
Title
Investigation of coarticulation in continuous
speech of Japanese

Issue Date 2004-09-01

Abstract: This study analyzed coarticulation involved in continuous speech based on articulographic
data obtained from three Japanese male speakers. Distribution of the articulation points of
vowels and consonants revealed that speakers might compensate for morphological differences in the
hard palate by adjusting the location of vowel articulation points. To evaluate the effects of the left and
right phonemes on the target phoneme, three-phoneme sequences, consisting of five Japanese vowels
(V) and ten apical and two palatal consonants (C), were extracted from read sentences and used in this
analysis. A stepwise multiple regression method was used to analyze the phoneme sequences, in order
to evaluate the eecontributionsff of the surrounding phonemes to the central one. The results showed
that the horizontal component of the articulatory movement had a dominant function during
articulation. The movement of the tongue tip was highly correlated to the tongue dorsum movement in
the horizontal dimension, but was almost independent in the vertical dimension. This phenomenon
suggested that coarticulation in VCV sequences can be considered as an independent consonantal
gesture superimposed on a transitional portion between vowels. For apical-vowel combinations, the
preceding consonant in CVC had a stronger effect on the vowel than the following one, but there was
no dominance caused by the positions of the vowels in VCV sequences. For palatal-vowel
combinations, the following phoneme showed a greater effect than the preceding phoneme in CVC
sequences. In VCV sequences, the open and closed vowels showed different behaviors.
Keywords: Speech production, Coarticulation, Speech dynamics, Articulatory movement, Speech
analysis
PACS number: 43.70.Bk, 43.72.Ar, 43.70.Fq [DOI: 10.1250/ast.25.318]
1. INTRODUCTION
Coarticulation is a natural phenomenon found in human
speech, and is affected both at the physiological level by
the properties of the speech organs, and in the motor
planning stage by the look-ahead mechanism. Coarticulation
generates the characteristics of natural sounding
speech, and at the same time introduces so-called suprasegmental
characteristics that degenerate phonemic boundaries.
It is therefore a crucial issue in both speech
synthesis and speech recognition to deal with coarticulation
when performing human speech behaviors.
In general, there are two types of coarticulatory
overlaps occurring during natural speech: the left-to-right
(LR, carryover) and right-to-left (RL, anticipatory). The
former reflects the sequence as the tongue, mandible, and
lips move from the preceding phoneme toward the
following one. In this case, the target of this phoneme is
reached in different ways, depending on the status of the
previous phoneme. Anticipatory (RL) coarticulation can
occur only if the speaker can eelook aheadff in time and
anticipate oncoming sounds. While LR coarticulation
occurs at the physiological level, RL coarticulation reflects
a high-level (central) type of phonological-phonetic processing,
since an entire segment must be scanned before it is
articulated [1]. To describe this process, Henke proposed a
phonemic-segment model [2]. Each segment with multiple
phonemes was described in a matrix of articulatory target
features, in which some features change abruptly as the
targets vary from one to another.
ON
hman investigated coarticulation in VCV utterances
using spectrographical measurements, in which three stop
e-mail: jdang@jaist.ac.jp
ye-mail: hon@waseda.jp
ze-mail: honda@atr.jp
318
Acoust. Sci. & Tech. 25, 5 (2004)
PAPER
consonants (C) and five vowels (V) were employed [3]. He
concluded that VCV articulation could be represented by a
basic diphthongal gesture with an independent consonantal
gesture superimposed on its transitional portion. Kiritani
observed articulatory movements for a Japanese speaker
using the X-ray microbeam system and investigated
coarticulation in VCV and CVC sequences within a carry
sentence [4]. He found that in CVC, the effect of the
preceding consonant on the vowel articulation was larger
than that of the following one, regardless of the vowel
types, while the following vowels in VCV sequences
showed larger effects than the preceding ones. Recasens et
al. employed electropalatographic data and the trajectory
of the second formant to investigate anticipatory and
carryover effects within VCV sequences, consisting of
seven consonants and two vowels /a/ and /i/ [5]. They
found that the effects were dependent on the degree of
articulatory constraint (DAC) of two adjacent phonemes,
where the DAC was defined as having three levels. They
also tried to model coarticulation between the consonants
and vowels using the DAC.
The dynamic characteristics of the speech organs have
been observed using X-ray cinematography, X-ray microbeam
system, and electromagnetic sensing systems, in
order to systematically analyze and model speech production
mechanisms. Shirai and Honda, for example, analyzed
X-ray data obtained from five Japanese male speakers, and
built a statistical model with five parameters, including the
jaw and tongue [6]. Maeda analyzed articulatory movements
obtained from an X-ray film of a French female
speaker and constructed a statistical articulatory model
with eight parameters [7]. Dang and Honda have developed
a physiological articulatory model with a target-based
control strategy [8?10]. The model was constructed based
on volumetric MR images and anatomic data, and is driven
by physiological mechanisms. The model is expected to
naturally realize the coarticulation caused by physiological
factors. However, the coarticulation derived from highlevel
processing, such as anticipation in the target planning
stage, has not yet been taken into account since there is
insufficient knowledge for quantifying such effects.
In this study, we attempt to clarify and quantify the
coarticulation involved in continuous speech based on
articulatory data obtained from the electromagnetic articulographic
system. Distribution of the articulatory points is
first investigated for vowels and consonants, to obtain a
uniform articulatory coordinate. We then evaluate contributions
of observation points to a target phoneme using a
stepwise multiple regression analysis. Finally, we investigate
the anticipatory (RL) and carryover (LR) effects of
the coarticulation separately by measuring changes in the
tongue shapes that resulted from the left and right
phonemes.
2. ARTICULATORY DATA AND LABELING
The articulatory data used in this study were collected
using the electromagnetic articulographic (EMA) system at
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Japan [11].
Figure 1 shows the placement of the receiver coils in the
experiment. Four receiver coils were placed on the tongue
surface in the midsagittal plane, from the tongue tip named
T1 through T4, and one coil each was placed on the upper
lip, lower lip, maxillary incisor, and mandible incisor (LJ).
The sampling rate was 250 Hz for the articulatory channels
and 16 kHz for the acoustic channel. Speech materials
comprised 360 Japanese sentences read by three adult male
Japanese speakers at a normal speech rate. The acoustic
data and the articulatory data were recorded simultaneously.
The central point of the phonemes was first labeled
manually, cross-referencing the acoustic cues to the
articulatory cues. The label location was then refined
automatically by finding the steady point of the articulators:
T1 was used for labeling apical consonants, and T3
for the others [11].
3. ANALYSIS OF SPEECH DYNAMICS
We first performed a preliminary analysis to investigate
effects of the individual morphological differences on the
speech dynamics. In the articulatory observation, each
phoneme was represented by a set of vectors with eight
points corresponding to the receiver coils. Phonetically, a
phoneme can be roughly described by a constriction
location in the vocal tract, which is usually caused by a
part of the articulators (cf. [12]). Therefore, it is not always
necessary to account for all the observation points. With
this in mind, we focus on three points in this study: the jaw
(LJ), tongue tip (T1), and tongue dorsum (T3), which were
Fig. 1 Placement of the receiver coils in the electromagnetic
articulographic experiment, and the coordinate
system used in this study. The gray circles show
the observation points in the target vector.
J. DANG et al.: COARTICULATION IN CONTINUOUS SPEECH
319
used to control our physiological articulatory model
[8?10]. These three points are represented in Fig. 1 by
the circles.
3.1. Articulatory Coordinate for Vowels and Consonants
Among the above three points, usually only one is
crucial for constructing a particular phoneme; the other
points are indecisive. Thus, the relation among the
phonemes can be analyzed using a distribution of the
crucial points (CP). In phonetic literature, distribution of
the CPs is commonly described based on isolated utterances.
However, CP distribution can vary during continuous
speech because of coarticulation. This study begins
with an investigation into the distribution of the CPs of the
tongue in continuous speech. Here, T1 is used to define the
CP for ten apical Japanese consonants (including alveolar
and post-alveolar consonants), and T3 is used for vowels
and the palatal consonants /k/ and /g/. The bilabial and
nasal consonants are not dealt with in this paper because
they are anatomically independent of the tongue. The
locations of the CPs were calculated by averaging the
coordinates over a segment of 20 ms, 6 samples of EMA
data surrounding the central point of the phoneme. For each
speaker, the dorsal CP was collected from about 1,600
segments for /a/, 1,200 for /i/, 900 for /u/, 800 for /e/
and 1,200 for /o/. The phoneme number included in this
data set varied from 50 to 300 for the consonants.
Figure 2 shows the mean locations of CP for the vowel
(T3) in the upper panels and for the apical CP (T1) in the
lower panels for three speakers. The coordinates correspond
to those in Fig. 1. The upper case characters denote
the mean location of the CP for vowels and consonants,
which is the average over the selected segments. The main
axis of the scattered CPs, denoted by the lines, was
calculated using a least mean square fitting approach. As
seen in the plots, the mean CPs for both vowels and
consonants have a roughly linear distribution, although the
scattering of the dorsal CPs is wider for speaker MH than
the others, and the scattering of the apical CPs is wider for
TO. The in-line distribution of the CPs in continuous
speech differs significantly from the common distributions
for vowel systems, which have been plotted as a triangular
or trapezoidal shape. This difference can be explained by
the fact that in continuous speech the tongue body moves in
a shortened path to achieve a minimal energy, rather than a
path with an exaggerated triangular distribution seen in
isolated words.
The fitting lines show the main direction of the
movements of the tongue tip and the dorsum. The lines
of the consonantal and vocalic movements have an
intersection with an acute angle by lengthening them in
articulatory space, which is named an articulatory coordinate.
It is interesting to find that the angles between the
directions of the consonantal and vocalic movements are
consistent with one another for all three speakers; angles
Fig. 2 Articulatory coordinates of vowels and consonants. The upper panels show the mean location of the crucial points
(T3) for vowels using upper case characters; the flowerer panels are for the apical consonants (T1). The lines are the
optimal fitting to the scattering distributions based on the least mean square method (Dimension: cm).
Acoust. Sci. & Tech. 25, 5 (2004)
320
were 61, 67, and 68 degrees, respectively. The articulatory
movement of the tongue tip to form an apical CP is heavily
dependent on the individual shape of the hard palate, where
slopes of the anterior portion of the hard palate for the three
speakers ranged from about 10 to 30 degrees referring to
the bite-plate plane. The presence of consistent angles
demonstrates that for a speaker who has a flatter hard
palate, the movement direction of the tongue body is more
tilted in vocalic articulation. This reveals the fact that in
articulation, speakers adjust the position of the CPs to
compensate for morphological differences in their hard
palate shapes. After this compensation, an optimal articulatory
space (the consistent coordinate) is achieved.
In processing such data, the head angle is usually
calibrated using the bite plate to obtain a compatible
coordinate between speakers. Since the shape of the hard
palate was not considered, that calibration is not always
optimal for constructing a compatible coordinate. For
example, the main direction of the CP of the tongue tip lay
almost horizontally for one of the speakers. In that
situation, it was difficult to obtain a reliable correlation
of the vertical and horizontal directions. In contrast, the
proposed articulatory coordinate provides a proper reference
for calibrating the speakersf head during the EMA
Fig. 3 Distribution of the CP (T3) of five Japanese vowels from one speaker. The left panels show the location of the CPs
in the articulatory space (dimensions in cm); the right panels show the relative frequency of the CPfs appearance in each
location (section number).
J. DANG et al.: COARTICULATION IN CONTINUOUS SPEECH
321
experiments. The calibration using the proposed coordinate
derives a maximum projection on the horizontal axis for
both the vocalic and consonantal movements, as shown in
Fig. 2. In the following part of the paper, eehorizontalff and
eeXff indicate the same axis, where the former is mainly
used to describe the spatial relationship and the latter
mainly for the data component. The same distinction is
used for eeverticalff and eeY.ff
3.2. Variation of Articulation and Acoustics
Because of coarticulation, both the left and right
phonemes affect movements of the articulators. For this
reason, phonemes in continuous speech usually show larger
variations in articulatory and acoustic characteristics than
in isolated words. This section investigates the variations in
articulatory and acoustic characteristics of the vowels.
Figure 3 shows the distribution of the tongue dorsum CP
(T3) of five Japanese vowels spoken by one speaker. As
seen in the left panels, the CP during continuous speech
shows a wide distribution in the horizontal dimension,
ranging from 0.9 to 1.4 cm for the five vowels. The vertical
distribution spans less than 0.3 cm for most vowels, while it
is 0.8 cm for /a/. This implies that the tongue moves more
widely in the horizontal dimension than in the vertical.
To examine the relationship between articulatory and
acoustic characteristics, the distribution of the CP is
segmented into nine equal sections in the horizontal
dimension. The appearance frequency of the CPs in each
section is defined by the ratio of the appearance number in
this section to the total number for the vowels, and shown
in the right panels. The black arrows indicate the section
with the highest appearance frequency, and the white
arrows denote the corresponding location of the CPs.
Figure 4 shows the first three formants (F1?F3) of the
vowels, which correspond to the nine sections of the CPs.
The second formant (F2) varies largely with the CP
locations while the first formant (F1) shows little change.
Consistent results were confirmed for the other speakers.
Roughly speaking, F1 mainly corresponds to the degree of
mouth opening, and F2 heavily depends on the anteriorposterior
location of the tongue. The F1 without obvious
changes implies that there are no significant changes in the
degree of mouth opening. This is consistent with one of the
articulatory characteristics for Japanese speakers, where
movements of the lips are relatively small. On the other
hand, the large horizontal movement of the tongue results
in an F2 with a large variation.
4. REGRESSION ANALYSIS OF
COARTICULATION
According to previous studies [1,13], the anticipatory
effects sometimes can span up to three phonemes. For
example, the velum possibly starts moving toward its target
at the third vocalic gesture before a nasal sound. To our
knowledge, there has been no report on the spanning
range of the carryover effects. In past studies [3?5], the
coarticulation was focused on the interval between the
immediately adjacent phonemes. Following those studies,
we consider the effects of vowels on consonants and of
consonants on vowels only for the immediately adjacent
(preceding and following) phonemes. Accordingly, VCV
and CVC sequences were adopted in this study. The
consonants were classified as two groups according to their
CPs: the apical consonants and palatal consonants.
4.1. Analysis Method
From the articulation point of view, the tongue tip and
dorsum can be considered as two independent CPs for
consonants and vowels, respectively. In fact, the movement
region of the tongue tip is constrained by the position of the
dorsum (tongue body), while the dorsum would follow the
tongue tip to construct a constriction at the apex. This
physical connection between the tongue tip and the dorsum
cannot be ignored when examining the relation between the
observation points. For this reason, we consider the spatial
(physiological) constraints of the articulators as well as the
temporal effects of the phoneme sequences in the coarticulation
analysis.
Since there is a high correlation between the jaw and
tongue, and between the tongue tip and dorsum, one
observation point can be described as a function of the
others. Accordingly, the CP coordinates are assumed to be
a linear function of the other factors, and the multiple
regression method is employed to evaluate the contribution
of each factor to the resultant articulatory movement of the
CP. Formulas (1) and (2) describe the X- and Ycomponents
of the CP for the tongue dorsum of the central
Fig. 4 Variation of the formants with the CP location phoneme, respectively,
for five Japanese vowels.
Acoust. Sci. & Tech. 25, 5 (2004)
322
T3xdiT ? c t X
n?it1
n?i1
wjdnTLJxdnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
wtdnTT1xdnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
n6?i
wddnTT3xdnT
t X
n?it1
n?i1
qjdnTLJydnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
qtdnTT1ydnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
qddnTT3ydnT
d1T
T3ydiT ? c t X
n?it1
n?i1
qjdnTLJydnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
qtdnTT1ydnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
n6?i
qddnTT3ydnT
t X
n?it1
n?i1
wjdnTLJxdnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
wtdnTT1xdnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
wddnTT3xdnT;
d2T
where i is the phoneme index, which was set as 2 since we
focus on the central phoneme in the three-phoneme
sequence. Here, w is the partial multiple regression
coefficients for X-components, q is for Y-components,
and c is a constant term. The subscripts j, t, and d denote
the coefficients for the jaw, tongue tip, and tongue dorsum,
respectively. The first line of the formulas is the factors in
the same dimension, and the second line is the factors from
the perpendicular dimension. Factors with the same
phoneme index (n ? i) describe the spatial constraints
between the different observation points.
For the apical consonants in VCV, the dependent
variable is T1. The description for T1 is similar to the
above formulas; Eq. (3) is for T1x and (4) for T1y.
T1xdiT ? c t X
n?it1
n?i1
wjdnTLJxdnT t X
n?it1
n?i  1
n6?i
wtdnTT1xdnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
wddnTT3xdnT
t X
n?it1
n?i1
qjdnTLJydnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
qtdnTT1ydnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
qddnTT3ydnT
d3T
T1ydiT ? c t X
n?it1
n?i1
qjdnTLJydnT t X
n?it1
n?i  1
n6?i
qtdnTT1ydnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
qddnTT3ydnT
t X
n?it1
n?i1
wjdnTLJxdnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
wtdnTT1xdnT t X
n?it1
n?i1
wddnTT3xdnT
d4T
In this analysis, the Z-score is used to standardize all
the variables. A backward stepwise regression is employed
to focus on the most significant factors [14]. The processing
starts with all factors and removes the least significant
terms in a stepwise fashion until all the remaining terms are
statistically significant. The probability of the rejection
region F > F was set PdF > FT ? 0:001. The multiple
correlation coefficients with the partial regression coefficients
(PRC) reflect the eecontributionff of each factor to
the target. The PRCs of the formulas (1)?(4) are used to
evaluate the effects of each factor on the CP of the central
phoneme. Note that after using the Z-score the partial
correlation coefficients (PCC) are proportional to the
partial regression coefficients. Therefore, this paper does
not calculate the PCCs directly. The following discussions
concerned with the correlation in the following section
reference to the PRCs.
4.2. Coarticulations within Different Combinations
Three-phoneme sequences of VCV and CVC were
segmented from read sentences. Four combinations were
used in this analysis: apical-vowel-apical (CVC), vowelapical-
vowel (VCV), palatal-vowel-palatal (CVC), and
vowel-palatal-vowel (VCV). The preceding and following
consonants in CVC come out of the same consonant group.
To obtain a reliable relation, the phrase boundaries were
marked and excluded from the VCV and CVC sequences.
The sequences with a pause were also excluded from the
materials for analysis. The data size for each speaker is
about 1,500 sequences for the combinations of vowels and
apical consonants, and about 90 for the combinations of
vowels and palatal consonants. The analysis was first
carried out for three speakers individually. The results
indicated that two speakers had a consistent tendency, but
one speaker showed some differences, especially for the
J. DANG et al.: COARTICULATION IN CONTINUOUS SPEECH
323
VCV sequence with apical consonants. To increase data
size and obtain reliable results, the data from the two
consistent speakers were put together and used in the
following analyses.
4.2.1. Results for apical-vowel-apical sequences
Figure 5 shows the PRCs obtained from 1,169 apicalvowel-
apical (CVC) sequences, where T3 of the central
vowels was described by Eqs. (1) and (2). The multiple
correlation coefficient (MCC) was 0.988 for T3x and 0.956
for T3y, and the average prediction errors were 0.069 cm
and 0.141 cm, respectively. The first eight variables are
concerned with X-components, shown in a dark color,
while the following eight are concerned with Y-components,
shown in a pale color, and the last one shows the
effects of the perpendicular dimension of the same
observation point. The dots indicate that the factors were
removed in the stepwise regression since they were
statistically less significant. The variables starting with
eepff and eefff denote the components of the preceding and
the following phonemes, respectively, and the others show
the components out of the same phoneme to account for
physiological constraints inter and/or intra the articulators.
For T3x on the upper panel, X-components in general
show a definite contribution to T3x, but Y-components do
not show any significant contribution. Among the Xcomponents,
the tongue tip and jaw shows large positive
PRCs. Effects of the preceding phoneme on T3x are
slightly greater than those of the following one. For T3y on
the lower panel, the Y-components show strong effects on
T3y, while the X-components also have comparable effects
with the Y-components. This implies that the dorsum
movement in the Y-dimension strongly depends on the Xcomponents
while the movement in the X-dimension is
almost independent of the Y-components.
During production of the central vowel, T1 and T3
have a higher correlation in the X-dimension but have no
significant correlation in the Y-dimension, which was
removed in the stepwise processing. This implies that the
tongue tip moves consistently with the dorsum in the Xdimension
but independently in the Y-dimension. Moreover,
T3y has a larger negative correlation with T3x,
indicating that the tongue moves in an oblique direction
from front-upper to back-lower.
It is natural to expect that the dorsum may have a
higher correlation to the lower jaw in the Y-dimension than
in the X-dimension. In this figure, however, the LJx has an
extremely high positive correlation with the T3x, which
implies that the movement of the dorsum is constrained by
the jaw in the X-direction more than in the Y-direction. For
the surrounding apical consonants, the PRCs of the jaw to
T3x are negative because the jaw moves in the opposite
directions during the vocalic gesture and the consonantal
gesture.
Both the preceding and following T3s of the apicals
positively contribute to the vocalic target T3. In contrast,
their T1xs negatively contribute to the target T3x. The
positive PRCs reflect the fact that the tongue dorsum
positions of the consonants are strongly dependent on the
adjacent vowels because the apical consonants have no
crucial target for the dorsum. The negative PRCs are
concerned with the movement of the tongue tip for the
apical target, which is opposite to the dorsal movement for
the vocalic target. The opposite motions in the Xdimension
during the apical consonants stretch the tongue
surface to make it flat. This is consistent with the
articulatory observation.
4.2.2. Results for vowel-apical-vowel sequences
Figure 6 shows the PRCs obtained from 3,226 vowelapical-
vowel (VCV) sequences. The crucial point of the
apical consonants, T1, was described by Eqs. (3) and (4).
The MCC was 0.990 for T1x and 0.961 for T1y, and the
prediction errors were 0.064 cm and 0.066 cm, respectively.
As seen in the case of CVC, the X-components play a
dominant role in forming the consonantal target.
To form an apical constriction, the tongue tip moves
forward at the same time the dorsum moves in the same
direction to synergize the tongue tip. This analysis
consistently shows that T3x contributes largely to T1x, as
shown in the upper panel. It is interesting to find that T3y
contributes more to T1x than T1y does. This may be
because in most cases an upward movement of the dorsum
induces a forward movement of the tongue tip, especially
in the vowel-apical-vowel context.
During both preceding and following vowels, the jaw
actively participates in the synergic coarticulation to form
Fig. 5 PRCs for vocalic target T3x (upper) and T3y
(lower) in apical-vowel-apical target. Dots denote the
removal of variables without statistical significance.
Acoust. Sci. & Tech. 25, 5 (2004)
324
the apical gesture since both the X- and Y-dimensions of
the jaw show the positive contribution to T1x. In contrast,
the jaw has negative PRCs during the consonants. The
opposite movement of the jaw to the tongue tip might be
required for forming a wide space in front of the apical
constriction.
Differing from Fig. 5, T1x shows an extremely large
PRC for T1y, while the other variables definitely have
small PRCs. This phenomenon indicates that the vertical
position of the tongue tip depends solely on its horizontal
position. Since the tongue tip contacts the hard palate in the
midsagittal or bilateral part in producing the apicals, for a
given X-position, the Y-position of the tongue is uniquely
determined according to the shape of the hard palate. This
is why the T1y of the apical target depends on its T1x alone.
In contrast, T1y did not show any significant contribution to
T1x, as seen in the upper panel.
In addition, pT1x and f T1x contribute positively to T1x
of the apical consonants, while pT3x and f T3x contribute
negatively. The positive contribution of the tongue tip
results from a synergic action of the surrounding vowels for
forming the apical targets of the consonants. At the same
time, the tongue dorsum moves backward to approach the
vocalic targets. This is why the pT3x and f T3x contribute
negatively to the forward apical movement. The result of
such an opposite motion is that the tongue surface becomes
flatter.
4.2.3. Results for palatal-vowel-palatal sequences
Figure 7 shows the PRCs obtained from 132 palatalvowel-
palatal (CVC) sequences, where the vocalic target
T3 was described by Eqs. (1) and (2). The MCC was 0.990
for T3x and 0.942 for T3y, and the prediction errors were
0.077 cm and 0.109 cm, respectively.
In this combination, vowels and consonants have the
same crucial point, T3. Since the tongue tip does not have a
crucial target, its movements show a good consistency with
those of the tongue dorsum. The result demonstrates that
T1 contributes heavily to T3 in both the X- and Ydimensions.
As seen in the other cases, the X-components
of the independent variables contribute more to T3x than
the Y-components do. The preceding and following
phonemes did not show any superiority of one over
another in their contribution.
Differing from the cases of the apical consonants, the
Y-component of the surrounding palatals does not show
any significant contribution to T3y. This is because the
dorsum always rises at about the same height to contact the
palate during production of the palatal consonants, irrespective
of the height of the dorsum during the vowel. T1y
gives a relatively large contribution to T3y since the tongue
tip and the dorsum drop during the release of the palatal
closure. The contribution of T3x to T3y is greater than that
of T3y to T3x. Again, this implies that the tongue dorsum
moves more actively in the X-dimension than in the Ydimension.
As shown in Fig. 5, the following phoneme
shows stronger effects on the T3y than the preceding one.
4.2.4. Results for vowel-palatal-vowel sequences
Figure 8 shows the PRCs obtained from 772 vowelpalatal-
vowel (VCV) sequences. The MCC was 0.989 for
T3x and 0.921 for T3y, and the prediction errors were
0.076 cm and 0.100 cm, respectively. As seen in Sec. 4.2.3,
T1 has large contributions to the dorsum in both X- and YFig.
7 PRCs for vocalic target T3x (upper) and T3y
(lower) in palatal-vowel-palatal sequences. Dots denote
the removal of variables without statistical
significance.
Fig. 6 PRCs for consonantal target T1x (upper) and T1y
(lower) in vowel-apical-vowel sequences. Dots denote
the removal of variables without statistical significance.
J. DANG et al.: COARTICULATION IN CONTINUOUS SPEECH
325
dimensions.
In general, X-components of the variables make greater
contributions to T3x than Y-components, which is a
common phenomenon for all the combinations. Both
vocalic T3xs represent positive PRCs for the palatal T3x
because the crucial point of each vowel affects the location
of the dorsal-palatal constriction. The negative PRCs of
vocalic T1x result from the opposite motion of the tongue
tip, which retracts backward during the palatals and
extends forward during the vowels. Retraction of the
tongue tip might be necessary for raising the tongue
dorsum by compressing the tongue body in the anteriorposterior
dimension. The following phoneme obviously
makes larger contributions to the T3y.
In this combination, the jaw and tongue tip work
together to synergize the movement of the dorsum in the Ydimension.
The jaw shows a clear contribution to T3y
during the palatal consonants, which was not seen in the
other combinations. This might suggest that there is a
special requirement for the jaw to generate a synergic
movement in forming the palatal-dorsal closure.
5. EVALUATION OF LR AND RL EFFECTS
To realize coarticulation in an articulatory model, the
left-to-right (LR) effect and the right-to-left (RL) effect
should be investigated separately. The former reflects the
carryover effects of the preceding phoneme on the
following one, whereas the latter corresponds to the
anticipatory effects of the following phoneme on the
preceding one. In this section, we evaluate the LR
(carryover) effect and RL (anticipatory) effect by examining
their relative influences of the preceding and
following phonemes on the central phoneme using the
three-phoneme sequences.
5.1. Method of Evaluation
The basic idea for the evaluation is to quantify the
effects of the lateral phonemes of the three-phoneme
sequences on the central phoneme, and then make a
comparison between the relative effects of the two sides.
To do this, we fix a selected phoneme on a given side of the
three-phoneme sequences and change the phonemes on the
opposite side, so that variations in the tongue shape would
be observed. The variation reflects the effects of the side
with varying phonemes. In the same way, we can measure
the effects of the other side by switching the sides and
fixing the same selected phoneme. The standard deviation
(STD) is used to evaluate variations in the tongue shape
resulting from this manipulation. For a given phoneme
sequence C1VC2, for example, we fix C2 and then replace
C1 by all possible consonants in the observation data one
by one. This replacement induces some variations in the
tongue shapes of the central vowel. The STD of the tongue
shapes from the average shape corresponds to effects of C1.
The STD value resulted from C1 is referred to as Std1.
Similarly, fixing C1 and replacing C2 by all the possible
consonants, we can obtain another STD for tongue shape
changes, named Std2. If Std1 is larger than Std2, it means
the preceding phoneme has greater effect than the following
one, and vice versa. Note that in this processing, all
four points on the tongue surface were used to describe
tongue shape, regardless of the definition of the CP. The
fixed phoneme was included from the varying phonemes in
the palatal-vowel-palatal sequence to increase data size,
while it was excluded in the other sequences.
5.2. LR Effect vs RL Effect
Table 1 shows the STD of tongue shapes during CVC
sequences, where the palatal and apical consonants were
treated as two separate groups. For a sequence of C1VC2,
Std1 is the value obtained by fixing C2 and altering C1, and
Std2 is the value obtained by the opposite order. The dark
shadow indicates that such combinations do not exist
symmetrically. The pale shadow denotes the case in which
the following phonemes have larger effects than the
preceding ones. The part without any shadow is for the
case in which the preceding phonemes have greater effects
than the following ones. In the results, the preceding
consonants show larger effects on the vowel /a/ while the
following ones have larger effects on /o/. For the other
vowels, there is no significant superiority shown between
the vowel positions.
For the selected sequences, the number of combinations
beginning with a given phoneme may be different from that
Fig. 8 PRCs for palatal target T3x (upper) and T3y
(lower) in vowel-palatal-vowel sequences. Dots denote
the removal of variables without statistical significance.
Acoust. Sci. & Tech. 25, 5 (2004)
326
of combinations terminated by the same phoneme. To
reduce some potential influences caused by the asymmetry
of the data, an identical number was chosen from the two
combinations in calculating the average value. The last two
rows, indicated by , show the average values over all the
vowels. The apical consonants show that the preceding
phonemes clearly tend to have larger effects on the vowels
than the following ones. For the palatal consonants, shown
in the last two columns, the following phonemes show
greater effects than the preceding ones. The two consonant
groups, meanwhile, show a different tendency to one
another.
Table 2 shows the STD (Std1 and Std2) of tongue
shapes during VCV sequences, where C denotes the apical
consonants. The shading has the same meaning as in
Table 1. In most cases, for individual consonants, the
preceding phoneme has a slightly greater effect than the
following one. For the average values, however, there is no
clear tendency corresponding to the vowels; both the
preceding and following vowels show about the same
magnitude of effect on the central apicals.
Table 3 shows the results for VCV with the palatal
consonants. For most combinations, the following vowel
has a greater effect on the consonant than the preceding
one. On average, for vowels /i/, /u/, and /e/, the
following vowel shows stronger effects on the palatals
than the preceding one, while for /a/ and /o/ the preceding
vowel shows larger effects. The opposite tendencies seem
to be attributed to closed vowels and open vowels. As
shown in Fig. 3, the CP is relatively loose (scattering more
widely) for the open vowels of /a/ and /o/, and is strict for
the closed vowels. The articulation points for both the
vowels and the palatals are on the dorsum, and they affect
each other during articulation. It can be expected that the
phonemes (vowels and consonants) with a strict CP have
stronger effects on the others.
6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this study, we investigated coarticulation within
three-phoneme sequences from Japanese read sentences,
where pauses and phrase boundaries were excluded. Our
analysis focused on the effects of coarticulations on
phoneme targets. For this purpose, each phoneme was
represented using three observation points in the stationary
period: the lower jaw, tongue tip, and tongue dorsum. In
continuous speech, distribution of the average crucial
points for both vowels (the tongue dorsum) and the apical
consonants (the tongue tip) was nearly linear. These two
distribution lines constructed an articulatory coordinate for
vowels and consonants, which was consistent for all three
speakers. Since the distribution of the apical CPs depends
heavily on the palate shape, the main direction of the
distribution is speaker-dependent. To construct a constant
Table 2 The STD (cm) of tongue shape variations for
V1CV2, where C is the apical consonant; Std1 is the
value obtained by fixing V2 and replacing V1 using all
the vowels, and Std2 is the value for the opposite order.
 indicates the average values over the consonants.
a i U e o
Std1 0.117
t
Std2 0.107 0.064 0.125
d Std1 0.134 0.127
Std2 0.140
0.106
0.105
0.076
0.069
0.109
0.110
0.070
0.059
0.118 0.089 0.138
s Std1 0.098 0.078
Std2 0.105 0.066 0.066
z Std1 0.140 0.086
Std2 0.101 0.060 0.047 0.093
sh Std1 0.078
Std2 0.068 0.100 0.077
0.075
0.065
0.084
0.070
0.082
0.105 0.056
Ts Std1
Std2 0.063 0.097
0.074
0.059 0.070
ch Std1
Std2 0.081 0.071
0.068
0.041 0.074
j Std1
Std2 0.073 0.057 0.063 0.058 0.068
Std1 0.090 0.063 0.095 0.107
* Std2 0.090 0.066 0.085 0.103
0.099
0.140
0.088
0.129
Table 3 The STD (cm) of tongue shape variations for
V1CV2, where C is the palatal consonant. The rest is
the same as that in Table 2.
a i U e o
Std1 0.299 0.158 0.137 0.204
k Std2 0.288 0.179 0.192 0.236
Std1 0.313 0.149 0.162 0.209
g Std2 0.292 0.237 0.161
0.147
0.184
0.215
Std1 0.304 0.153 0.322
* Std2 0.289 0.214 0.242
0.320
0.265
0.322
0.214
0.206
0.228
Table 1 The STD (cm) of tongue shape variations for
C1VC2. Std1 is the value obtained by fixing C2 and
replacing C1 by all the consonants, and Std2 is the
value obtained in the opposite order.  denotes the
average values over all the vowels. Note that the
calculation was carried out for the palatal and apical
consonants separately.
t d s z sh Ts ch J k g
Std1 0.162 0.186
0.129
0.106 0.108 0.108 0.102 0.106 0.118 0.095
a
Std2 0.135 0.064 0.119 0.097
Std1 0.158 0.076 0.198 0.084
0.100
0.095
0.151 0.103 0.062 0.070 0.025 0.058
i
Std2 0.157 0.076 0.091 0.025 0.058
Std1 0.108 0.096 0.061 0.139 0.053 0.029 0.107 0.099
u
Std2 0.112 0.128 0.099
Std1 0.040 0.065 0.077 0.077 0.059 0.212
e
Std2 0.070
0.170
0.168
0.092 0.056 0.067 0.212
Std1 0.191 0.170 0.203 0.126 0.145 0.136 0.130
o
Std2 0.236
0.229 0.213 0.166
0.187 0.199 0.134
0.122
0.084
0.211 0.151 0.110
* Std1 0.226 0.130 0.212 0.167 0.136 0.128
Std2 0.199 0.098 0.072 0.084 0.140 0.134
J. DANG et al.: COARTICULATION IN CONTINUOUS SPEECH
327
angle between the vocalic and consonantal distributions, it
seems that the speakers adjust the movement directions of
the dorsum while producing vowels to fit the consonant
distribution. This implies that the speakers might compensate
for the morphological difference of the hard palate by
adjusting the main moving direction of the tongue for the
vowels.
6.1. Coarticulation and Context
Four combinations of three-phoneme sequences were
used in this study, which consist of vowels, apical
consonants, and palatal consonants. The CP of the central
phoneme was represented by a linear function of the
observation vectors with 17 elements. A stepwise multiple
regression method was adopted to focus the analysis on the
factors with statistical significance. For this linear description,
multiple correlations were about 0.99 for the Xdimension
and 0.92 for the Y-dimension, and the prediction
errors were about 0.07 cm for the X-dimension and about
0.1 cm for the Y-dimension. Because of the high correlations
and small prediction errors, we can expect this
analysis to give reliable results.
The X-component of the independent variables showed
dominant contributions to both X- and Y-components of the
CP of the central phoneme in all the combinations. This
result suggests that Japanese speakers may control tongue
movement more actively in the horizontal dimension than
that in the vertical dimension. Our model simulation
confirmed this suggestion to some extent, in which for a
given force the tongue muscles generated a larger movement
for the tongue dorsum in the horizontal dimension
than that in the vertical dimension [10].
Using the above result, we may explain the opposite
behaviors of the preceding and following phonemes in
CVC sequence. There, the preceding phoneme had larger
PRCs in the X-dimension than the following one, whereas
the following phoneme showed larger PRCs in the Ydimension
than the preceding one. The former phenomenon
may be related to the basic CV structure of Japanese, in
which the vowel has a closer relationship with the
preceding phoneme than the following one. The latter
phenomenon may be explained as a passive component of
movement if Japanese speakers truly control movements in
the X-dimension more actively as mentioned above. In
other words, the Y-movement of the dorsum behaves as a
relaxation motion (carryover effects), which depends on
the past deformation. Thus, it is reasonable to state that the
movement for the right phoneme in the Y-dimension
depends more on the central vowel. Similar tendency can
be seen in palatal-vowel combinations.
In V-apical-V sequences, T1x of both preceding and
following vowels contributes positively to apical T1x while
the T3x of both the vowels contributes negatively. The
positive contribution results from a synergic action of the
surrounding vowels for forming the apical targets of the
consonants. The negative contribution implies that the
dorsum moves in the opposite directions during the vocalic
gesture and consonantal gesture. The opposite motions in
X-dimension during the apical consonants stretch the
tongue surface to make it flat. This result is consistent
with the articulatory observation.
The tongue tip and the dorsum have a high correlation
in the X-direction but they almost have no correlation in the
Y-direction. According to the results from VCV with apical
consonants, the X-positions are the dominant factor for
movements of the tongue tip. The Y-movement of the
tongue tip seems to be an independent motion superimposed
on a continuous movement of the body (see Fig. 6
for details). This observation supports ON hmanfs conclusion
that VCV articulation could be represented by a basic
diphthongal gesture with an independent consonantal
gesture superimposed on its transitional portion [3].
The majority of the combinations showed the dorsum
moves more consistently with the jaw in the X-direction
than in the Y-direction. This is somewhat different from the
conventional wisdom, and might imply that the translation
movement of the jaw may positively contribute to tongue
movement during speech. In the combination of V-palatal-
V, however, the jaw shows a clear contribution to T3y
during the palatal consonants, and the jaw and tongue tip
work together to synergize the movement of the dorsum in
the Y-dimension. It might suggest that there is a special
requirement for the jaw to generate a synergic movement in
forming the palatal-dorsal closure.
6.2. LR Effect and RL Effects
We used the standard deviation of the tongue shape of
the central phoneme to evaluate the relative effects from
the phonemes on the left and right sides. The deviation was
measured by fixing one phoneme on a given side and
varying the phonemes on the other side. The results showed
that in apical-V-apical (CVC) sequences the preceding
consonant affected the vowel more strongly than the
following one. This result is the same as the one obtained
by the regression analysis, and is also consistent with the
one observed in [4]. Unlike CVC, in V-apical-V sequences,
the effects of the preceding and the following vowels on
the central consonant did not show any significant positional
difference. This observation was not consistent with that
in [4].
In [5], Recasens et al. investigated the LR and RL
effects by examining the transition between the consonant
and vowel when fixing a phoneme at one end. They found
that some coarticulations were vowel-dependent and others
were consonant-dependent. The dependences were concerned
with the degree of articulation constraint (DAC),
Acoust. Sci. & Tech. 25, 5 (2004)
328
where the DAC scale ranks phonetic sound categories from
maximally to minimally constrained as follows: /S/, /a/,
/i/, /k/, dark /l/, (/s/) (DAC = 3) > /n/, /a/, (/s/)
(DAC = 2) > /p/, /@/ (DAC = 1) [5]. Referring to the
DAC, the apical consonants in general have a larger effect
on vowels at the crucial point because the consonants have
stricter constraints than vowels. This may be the reason
why vowels do not show any significant positional difference
on the apicals.
For vowel-palatal combinations, clear tendencies were
shown in both CVC and VCV. For CVC sequences, the
following palatal generally showed larger effects on the
vowels. For VCV, the preceding vowel showed a greater
effect than the following one when fixing open vowels,
while the opposite tendency was shown when fixing closed
vowels. How should we explain this phenomenon? Here,
we suppose that the look-ahead mechanism works on the
vowel sequence over the palatal consonant as observed in
[2], and the DAC plays an important role in coarticulation
[5]. Accordingly, the CP of the right vowel affects that of
the left vowels, and the extent of the effects depends on the
DAC of the vowels. When fixing /i/ on the right side, for
example, the replaceable vowels on the left side are
/a,u,e,o/. According to the look-ahead mechanism, the CP
of the left vowels approaches that of /i/ to some extent, so
that the difference between the left and right vowels gets
smaller. If fixing /i/ on the left side, in contrast, the CP of
/i/ does not approach the CP of /a,u,e,o/ so much because
/i/ has a higher DAC, and thus the difference between the
left and right vowels is larger than in the former case.
Therefore, the combination of /a,u,e,o/-palatal-/i/ has a
smaller STD than /i/-palatal-/a,u,e,o/. When fixing /a/,
the replaceable vowels are /i,u,e,o/, whose DACs are
higher than or the same as that of /a/. The CP of /a/
approaches the CP of /i,u,e,o/ if /a/ is fixed on the left side
so that the difference between the left and right vowels
becomes smaller. If /a/ is on the right side, the difference
is not reduced since /a/ cannot strongly affect /i,u,e,o/.
As a result, /a/-palatal-/i,u,e,o/ has a smaller STD than
/i,u,e,o/-palatal-/a/. From the above, one can see that all
the results of the vowel-palatal combinations can be
explained using the look-ahead mechanism and the DAC.
It has been observed that the articulation point for the
palatal consonants is easily affected by vowels (cf. [12]).
This analysis for vowel-palatal combinations showed a
consistent result with the observation. The results for the
vowel-palatal combination can be explained by using the
look-ahead mechanism. However, the results from the
apical-V-apical sequences showed that the preceding
consonant had greater effects than the following one. A
possible reason for this difference is that in vowel-apical
combinations the CPs switch between the tongue tip and
the dorsum, but the CPs in vowel-palatal combination are
always located in the same place, the dorsum. In vowelapical
combinations, the targets for the tongue tip and
dorsum can overlap temporally, and/or reach optimal
positions for both targets by a deformation of the tongue,
for example, a stretch of the tongue surface. In this case,
effects of carryover are also playing an important role. In
contrast, in vowel-palatal combinations, the CP for the
palatals tends to approach the following vocalic target for
the coarticulation as well as accept some effects from the
previous vocalic target. Accordingly, both phenomena are
not contradictory to the look-ahead mechanism. This
hypothesis will be verified in future studies, using
simulations with our physiological articulatory model [10].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has been supported in part by CREST of
Japan Science and Technology. The authors would like
to thank Pascal Perrier and Donna Erickson for their
beneficial comments on this work.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Raymond, The Physiology of Speech and Hearing (Prentice-
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1980).
[2] L. Henke, eeDynamic articulatory model of speech production
using computer simulation,ff Doctoral Dissertation, MIT,
(1966).
[3] S. ON hman, eeCoarticulation in VCV utterances: Spectrographic
measurements,ff J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 39, 151?168 (1966).
[4] S. Kiritani, eePerturbation of the consonant and vowel
articulation by a adjacent segments,ff J. Acoust. Soc. Jpn. (J),
34, 132?139 (1978).
[5] D. Recasens, M. Pallares and J. Fontdevila, eeA model of
lingual coarticulation based on articulatory constraints,ff
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 102, 544?561 (1997).
[6] K. Shirai and M. Honda, eeEstimation of articulatory parameters
from speech sound,ff Trans. IECE, 61, 409?416 (1978).
[7] S. Maeda, eeCompensatory articulation during speech: evidence
from the analysis of vocal tract shapes using an articulatory
model,ff in Speech Production and Speech Modelling, W. J.
Hardcastle and A. Marchal, Eds. (Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht, 1990), pp. 131?149.
[8] J. Dang and K. Honda, eeA physiological model of a dynamic
vocal tract for speech production,ff Acoust. Sci. & Tech., 22,
415?425 (2001).
[9] J. Dang and K. Honda, ee Estimation of vocal tract shape from
sounds via a physiological articulatory model,ff J. Phonet., 30,
511?532 (2002).
[10] J. Dang and K. Honda, eeConstruction and control of a
physiological articulatory model,ff J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 115,
853?870 (2004).
[11] T. Okadome and M. Honda, eeGeneration of articulatory
movements by using a kinematic triphone model,ff J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., 110, 453?463 (2001).
[12] K. Stevens, Acoustic Phonetics (MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
2000).
[13] K. Moll and R. Daniloff, eeInvestigation of timing of velar
movement during speech,ff J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 50, 678?684
(1971).
[14] N. Draper and H. Smith, Applied Regression Analysis, 2nd Ed.
(John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1981), pp. 307?312.
J. DANG et al.: COARTICULATION IN CONTINUOUS SPEECH
329