
Title
Beam-Selection Performance Analysis of a Switched
Multibeam Antenna System in Mobile Communications
Environments

Issue Date 1997-02

Abstract?The probability of incorrect beam selection (PIBS)
with a switched multibeam antenna system is theoretically analyzed
under power-limited and interference-limited mobile communication
environments. Periodic transmission of unique word
sequence followed by information symbol sequence is assumed.
The model of beam selection used in this paper is based upon a
simple three-stage mechanism: 1) signal validation; 2) averaging;
and 3) selection of the largest output. Complex correlation peaks
corresponding to the unique words, detected by the matched filter
for the signal validation, are averaged over several consecutive
unique words, and a beam having the largest output is selected.
Equally weighted noncoherent integration is assumed for the
averaging process. The beam selection takes place frame-byframe.
The first half of this paper is devoted to the PIBS derivation
for a simple switched two-beam antenna system. Numerical
calculation results are then presented. The latter half of this
paper investigates the impact of the incorrect beam selection on
overall average signal-to-noise (SNR) power ratio and signal-tointerference
(SIR) power ratio. The amount of the overall SNR
(or SIR) improvement over the omnidirectional antenna depends
on the propagation conditions. In general, larger improvements
can be achieved by smaller values of PIBS.
Index Terms?Digital cellular system, switched multibeam antenna,
TDMA, time diversity, unique word detection.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE ARRAY antenna with adaptive beam forming has
been recognized as being effective in suppressing cochannel
interference by steering nulls to interferers, thereby improving
the signal-to-interference (SIR) power ratio on the
desired signal component. In cellular configurations, this allows
cochannel interferers to be located in cells closer to
the reference cell than those with omnidirectional antennas,
or even in the same cell. References [1] and [2] analyze the
capacity enhancement achieved by a base-station array antenna
system with adaptive beam forming and discuss a practical
antenna configuration. Reference [3] analyzes the capacity
Manuscript received April 21, 1995; revised October 11, 1995 and February
28, 1996.
T. Matsumoto was with NTT America, Inc., Lafayette, CA 94549 USA.
He is now with NTT Mobile Communications Network, Inc., Yokosuka,
Kanagawa 239, Japan.
S. Nishioka was with NTT America, Inc., Lafayette, CA 94549 USA. He
is now with NTT America, New York, NY 10178 USA.
D. Hodder is with Telecommunications Group, Inc., Houston, TX 77004
USA.
Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9545(97)01308-X.
improvement with a base-station antenna array for a code
division multiple access (CDMA) mobile communications
system.
One major drawback of the adaptive beam-forming array
antenna is that given the number of array elements, the beam
gains are subject to the usersÅf geographical locations: the
shorter the geographical distance between the desired user and
interferers, the smaller the beam gain. This problem can be
eliminated by adaptive signal combining [4]?[6] rather than
beam forming. The array antenna system with adaptive signal
combining does not require the antenna elements to be located
close enough to achieve beam directivity, but it requires them
to be separated in space so that fading variations on the
received signals can be regarded as statistically independent.
This requirement is similar to diversity reception. Reference
[7] derives, given a number of antenna elements, the number of
interferers the array can suppress and the equivalent diversity
order the array achieves. With this idea, several usersÅf signals,
even coming from the same direction, can be resolved.
Both the beam-forming and signal combining antennas
require adaptive signal processing to determine the optimal
weight coefficients that meet their criteria. In mobile communications
environments, the received complex envelopes of the
desired and interference signals vary rapidly due to fading.
Therefore, the adaptive signal processing must ÅgtrackÅh the
change in the fading envelope so that the weight coefficients
always meet the optimality requirements. If the tracking performance
with the adaptive algorithm is not sufficient, antenna
performances may degrade.
One simple alternative to the adaptive antennas is the
switched multibeam antenna system, in which several narrow
beams are used to cover the entire coverage of the base station
[8]. A beam receiving the desired signal with the highest
signal strength among the beams is selected. Even with this
simple mechanism, the spectrum efficiency of the cellular
system can be improved. This is because the narrower the
beam, the smaller the probability that interference signals are
received by the same beam selected for the desired signal. A
similarity may be found between this concept and sectored
cell configurations. However, the switched beam antenna does
not require a handoff process, even if a user moves to another
beam. Handoff to a different carrier may be initiated if none of
the signals received by any beams does not satisfy a quality
requirement.
0018?9545/97$10.00 a 1997 IEEE
MATSUMOTO et al.: BEAM-SELECTION PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 11
Fig. 1. Propagation scenario and antenna gains.
The beam selection takes place using a sequence of unique
words periodically embedded in the transmitted symbol sequence,
and the sequence received by the selected beam is
output. Each antenna element is followed by a filter matched
to the unique word waveform. Simple signal processing using
the outputs of the matched filters suppresses the effect of interferences
on the beam selection. This process is referred to as
ÅgvalidationÅh for convenience. However, this signal validation
process may not be perfect. Hence, a major problem inherent
within the switched multibeam antenna system is incorrect
beam selection; a beam receiving a desired signal component
having the highest SIR plus noise power ratio cannot be
selected. Therefore, a pragmatic consideration should be given
to two issues: how frequently the incorrect beam selection
happens under various mobile propagation scenarios and how
serious the outcome is that results from the incorrect selection.
This paper theoretically analyzes the probability of incorrect
beam selection (PIBS) with a switched multibeam antenna
system. A two-beam antenna is assumed for simplicity. It is
assumed that there is one desired user and one interferer and
that each of the desired and interference transmissions has
two propagation paths: one goes to one of the two beams and
the other goes to the other beam. It is shown that the PIBS
is dominated by the power ratio of the two desired signal
components; if the ratio is small, a relatively high PIBS results.
The impact of the incorrect beam selection on overall
average signal-to-noise power ratio (SNR) and SIR power ratio
is then investigated. It is shown that in both the power-limited
and interference-limited environments, larger overall SNR (or
SIR) improvements over the omnidirectional antenna can be
achieved with smaller values of the average PIBS. The amount
of the improvement depends on the power ratios of both the
two desired signal components and two interference signal
components.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents
the system model used. A mathematical model of the signal
processing for the signal validation and beam selection
is described. In Section III, it is shown that the decision
variable used in the beam-selection process can be expressed
as a quadratic form of the complex random variable vector
comprised of desired, interference, and noise components at
the matched filter output. This implies that eigenvalues of
the matrix with the quadratic form are needed to calculate
the PIBS. Some numerical algorithms may be applicable to
the eigen analysis. Section IV presents, for the quaternary
phase shift keying (QPSK), numerical calculation results for
the PIBS under various propagation environments. In Section
V, the impacts of the incorrect beam selection on the overall
SNR and SIR enhancements are discussed.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
A. Channel Model
There is one desired user and one cochannel interferer in
the system being considered. The base station has a switched
two-beam antenna system. Each antennaÅfs main beam covers
a separate area, but its side lobe overlaps another main beamÅfs
coverage.1 Each of the desired and interference transmissions
has two propagation paths: one goes to one of the two
elementÅfs main beams and the other goes to the other. As
shown in Fig. 1, main beams and their side lobes have complex
beam gains of , where and each take values of one or
two. indexes the antenna element, expresses the direction
of the th elementÅfs main beam, and expresses each userÅfs
th propagation path.
It is assumed that the two propagation paths for each
user are subjected to independent frequency-flat Rayleigh
fading. Fading variation with the desired signal is statistically
independent of that with the interference. A block diagram of
the multipath channel and antenna system is shown in Fig. 2.
Output samples and of the first and second elements
can, respectively, be expressed as
(1.1)
and
(1.2)
where , , with and
being, respectively, the fading complex envelopes with
the desired userÅfs first and second paths, ,
, with and being, respectively,
the fading complex envelopes with the interfererÅfs first and
second paths, and is the sampling period. and
, with and being, respectively,
the desired userÅfs and interfererÅfs waveforms at the receiver
filter output. We assume that the difference in the propagation
delay between the two propagation paths is small enough
compared to the sampling period . and
, with and being, respectively,
the filtered Gaussian noise components on the two antenna
element outputs.
1The beam pattern itself is not within the scope of this paper; the twobeam
configuration assumed in this paper is the model for the PIBS analysis.
In actual base stations, antenna beams may have more complex patterns; even
main beams may overlap each other. The PIBS derivation process described
in this paper can be applied to that situation and should result in similarity in
the performances.
12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 46, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 1997
Fig. 2. Block diagram of multipath channel and antenna system.
B. Beam Selection
A block diagram for overall signal processing for the beam
selection is shown in Fig. 3(a). The overall signal processing is
comprised of three stages: 1) signal validation; 2) averaging;
and 3) selection of the largest output. The signal validation
process uses a sequence of unique words periodically embedded
in the transmitted symbol sequence.2 Fig. 3(b) shows the
frame format. The symbol sequence received by the selected
beam is output frame-by-frame. The unique word consists of
symbols. Sampling of the receiver filter output takes place
times a symbol. Hence, , where is the symbol
duration.
Each antenna element is followed by a matched filter
matched to the unique word waveform. A simple configuration
of the matched filter is shown in Fig. 3(c). The sample
sequence is the input to the matched filter. It is assumed that
the receiver knows the timing at which the desired signalÅfs
unique word is received, but it does not know the interfererÅfs
transmitted symbol sequence. The interfererÅfs symbol timing
is asynchronous with the desired signalÅfs symbol timing.
The matched filter output at that timing can be expressed as
(2.1)
where
(2.2)
(2.3)
indexes the element number, and and denote
transpose and complex conjugate, respectively. The matched
filter output for the two antenna elements can be obtained by
2 Periodic unique word transmission is a popular technique in digital
mobile communications systems. The unique word is usually used for many
purposes such as radio link control, timing adjustment, quality checking, and
equalization.
substituting (1.1) and (1.2) into (2.1). For the th unique word,
the matched filter outputs become
(3.1)
and
(3.2)
where
(3.3)
(3.4)
and
(3.5)
with
(3.6)
(3.7)
(3.8)
(3.9)
(3.10)
(3.11)
, and .
The best performance should be achieved by the coherent
integration that first cophases the matched filter outputs and
then sums them up. This process requires estimates of the
complex fading envelope, for which some adaptive algorithms
may be used. This is beyond the scope of this paper. One
simple alternative to the averaging process in fading channels
is noncoherent integration: the squared matched filter output
MATSUMOTO et al.: BEAM-SELECTION PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 13
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3. (a) Block diagram for overall signal processing for beam selection, (b) frame format, and (c) matched filter for the unique word waveform.
is equally weighted and summed up3 over several
consecutive unique words. The noncoherent combiner output
can then be expressed as
(4)
where is the averaging times. The decision on the beam
selection is made based on the decision variable given by
(5)
If , the beam corresponding to the first element is
selected. Otherwise, the second beam is selected.
III. PIBS DERIVATION
A. One-Shot Observation
For the derivation of the PIBS, a special case with
is first considered for simplicity. After several manipulations,
3The signal validation and noncoherent integration process is analogous
with the energy detection of the supervisory audio tone (SAT) used in the
advanced mobile phone service (AMPS) system for cell identification [11].
the decision variable is found
to be expressed as
(6.1)
where
(6.2)
and
(6.3)
as shown in (6.4)?(6.6) at the bottom of the page. Hence, it
is found that the decision variable can be expressed as a
quadratic form of the complex random variable vector .
The desired signal and interference components and
( ) at the matched filter output in (6.2) are the
sums of the fading complex envelopes, as shown in (3.3) and
(3.4), respectively. Hence, and become zero-mean
independent complex Gaussian processes with variances of
and , where
and are, respectively, the correlation matrices of
14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 46, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 1997
the fading complex envelopes with the desired userÅfs and
interfererÅfs th paths. Let and be denoted by
...
. . .
...
(7.1)
and
...
. . .
...
(7.2)
where for , and
, with being the average desired
signal power of the th propagation path and being the
average interference power of the th propagation path. If
JakesÅf fading model [9] is used,
and , where and are
the maximum Doppler frequencies for the desired user and
interferer, respectively, and is the zeroth-order Bessel
function of the first kind.
The noise components Åfs at the matched filter output
in (6.2) are the sums of the samples of the filtered Gaussian
noise, as shown in (3.5). Hence, Åfs also become zero-mean
independent complex Gaussian processes with variances of
, where is the correlation
matrix of the filtered Gaussian process. Let be denoted by
...
. . .
...
(8)
where , with being the
noise power. If the receiver filter has its transfer function of
, then
(9.1)
with being the autocorrelation function of the filtered
noise given by
(9.2)
Since (6.1) is a quadratic form of the complex random
variable vector , the decision variable Åfs characteristic
function can be expressed using the matrix
, given by (6.3) as
(10)
where is Åfs autocorrelation matrix given by (11), as
shown at the bottom of the page. The characteristic function
given by (10) can be rewritten as
(12)
where Åfs are the eigenvalues of the product matrix .
Some numerical algorithms may be used to obtain the eigenvalues.
The probability density function (pdf) of and
can be calculated as an inverse Laplace transform of
using the eigenvalues. The probabilities that and
can then be calculated using the pdf.
Note that if the eigenvalues are distinct, (12) may be
rewitten as [10]
(13)
where Åfs are the residues of . In this case, the
probability of can be calculated as
Prob (14)
B. Multiframe Observation
In the case of , an additional index is used to
express the th unique word, where vector , given by (6.2),
is rewitten as
(15)
where and are, with , the th path components
of the desired signal and interference, respectively, in
the matched filter output at the th unique word timing.
is the noise component in the th element output. Using ,
the decision variable given by (4) can also be expressed in a
quadratic form as
(16.1)
(6.4)
(6.5)
and
(6.6)
MATSUMOTO et al.: BEAM-SELECTION PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 15
Fig. 4. Propagation scenario for numerical calculations.
where
(16.2)
and
...
...
. . .
(16.3)
The pdf of can be obtained through the characteristic
function approach by using and Åfs autocorrelation matrix
instead of and in (10), respectively,
where the size of becomes 6 6 .
IV. NUMERICAL CALCULATIONS
Fig. 4 shows the model used in numerical calculations. It
is assumed that the desired userÅfs first path has the same
incoming direction as the interfererÅfs second path (in this case,
and ), and the desired userÅfs second
path has the same incoming direction as the interfererÅfs first
path ( and ). Furthermore, we assume
for simplicity
(17.1)
and
(17.2)
where is the main beamÅfs complex gain and
is the sidelobe beamÅfs complex gain. is the
main beamÅfs amplitude gain, and is the sidelobe attenuation
factor.
QPSK is assumed for a modulation scheme. Unique word
length and frame length are, respectively, assumed to be
4 and 256 symbol long. The desired user transmits a fixed
quaternary unique word pattern at every unique word timing,
and the interferer transmits a quaternary random sequence, but
the interfererÅfs symbol timing is not synchronized with the
desired userÅfs. A Nyquist raised cosine transfer function was
used for an overall filter response that is shared equally by the
transmitter and receiver. The overall filter response waveform
is given by
(18)
where is the rolloff factor. This waveform is equivalent to
the autocorrelation function of the noise component at
the receiver filter output.
Prior to the PIBS calculations, the effects of timing offset
, per-symbol sampling times , and the power ratio of
the two interference components, , were evaluated. It
was found from the preliminary calculations that the PIBS is
insensitive to these factors, and, therefore, in the following
PIBS calculations, and dB were assumed.
For a fixed desired signalÅfs unique word pattern, PIBS was
calculated for various interference waveforms corresponding
to the random symbol patterns having symbol timing difference
from the desired signal and then averaged. This
process was repeated for other unique word patterns and
further averaged. It is assumed that dB,
dB, , and .
A. Power-Limited Environment
In power-limited environments, and .
The average SNR on the omnidirectional antenna becomes
. Fig. 5 shows, for the averaging times
, the average Prob versus the average
SNR on the omnidirectional antenna, with the power ratio
and the desired signalÅfs maximum Doppler frequency
normalized by the symbol duration as parameters.
The average Prob decreases as the average SNR
increases. This decrease in Prob is more rapid with
than with . This is because of
the time?diversity improvement inherent within the averaging
process. As the average SNR becomes large, the decrease in
Prob plateaus. This floor in Prob is due
to ; even for a sufficiently large value of , a beam
receiving the desired signal component on the second path is
likely to be selected if the second path component has a large
signal power.
...
...
(11)
16 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 46, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 1997
Fig. 5. Average Prob(D < 0) under power-limited environment.
Fig. 6 shows, for the average SNR dB and
, the average Prob versus the number of the
unique words for averaging, with as a parameter. The
time?diversity improvement achieved by the averaging process
can be seen clearly in the plot of the average Prob .
However, for dB, the decrease in the average
Prob is very slow, and, hence, averaging is not
effective.
B. Interference-Limited Environment
In interference-limited environments, . The average
SIR power ratio on the omnidirectional antenna becomes
. Fig. 7 shows, for , the
average Prob versus the average SIR on the
omnidirectional antenna, with and the desired and
interference signalsÅf normalized maximum Doppler frequency
as parameters. The similarlity to the average
Prob in the power-limited environment can be seen
in the performance in the interference-limited environment.
The time?diversity improvement can be obtained if is
large and .
The average Prob versus is shown in Fig. 8
for and dB, with as a
parameter. As increases, the average Prob
reduces. If , this Prob
reduction is in proportion to . This indicates that
the equivalent diversity order of four can be achieved with
. This is because with the frame length of 256 symbols,
the fading variations at the four unique word timings are
statistically independent for . If
fading is very slow ( ), no time?diversity
Fig. 6. Average Prob(D <0) versus number of unique words for averaging
under a power-limited environment.
Fig. 7. Average Prob(D < 0) under interference-limited environment.
improvement is achieved; the Prob reduction is in
proportion to .
MATSUMOTO et al.: BEAM-SELECTION PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 17
Fig. 8. Average Prob(D < 0) versus D1=D2.
Fig. 9 shows, for dB and ,
the average Prob versus the averaging times ,
with as a parameter. The time?diversity improvement
achieved by the averaging process can clearly be seen in the
plot of the average Prob ; however, for a small value
of , averaging is not effective.
V. DISCUSSIONS
Let us assume that fading envelope variations with the
desired and interference signal components received by the
selected beam are independent of the beam-selection process.
This assumption is not always correct. However, if the frame
length is sufficiently large compared to the maximum Doppler
frequency, this assumption is a reasonable approximation. In
this section, impacts of the incorrect beam selection on the
average overall SNR and SIR are investigated.
A. Power-Limited Environment
Average SNRÅfs on the first and second element outputs are
and ,
respectively. If , the first element has the correct
main beam. This condition is equivalent to , where
. Hence, average PIBS average Prob
if . For the average PIBS of , the average overall SNR
after beam selection can be approximated by
(19)
Fig. 9. Average Prob(D <0) versus number of unique words for averaging
under interference-limited environment.
The gain in the average overall SNR over the
omnidirectional antennaÅfs average SNR then becomes
(20)
Fig. 10 shows the gain in the average SNR versus
, with the average PIBS as a parameter for
dB and dB. and are also plotted. It is
found that the gain on the correct beam increases, and the gain
on the incorrect beam decreases as increases. The gain
on the correct beam approaches its maximum of dB.
The gain on the incorrect beam approaches its minimum of 0
dB. Even with PIBS , the gain is around 7.3 dB for all
the values of . With PIBS , the gain is between
7.3 dB and the gain on the correct beam. Hence, in powerlimited
environments, an SNR improvement of over 7.3 dB
can be achieved with dB and dB, even if
the average PIBS is relatively large.
B. Interference-Limited Environment
SIRÅfs on the first and second element output are
and ,
respectively. If , the first element has the correct
main beam. This condition is equivalent to , where
and . Hence, average PIBS average
Prob if . The average overall SIR after
beam selection can be approximated by
(21)
18 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 46, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 1997
Fig. 10. Gain in average SNR (dB) under power-limited environment.
The gain in the average overall SIR over the
omnidirectional antennaÅfs average SIR then becomes
(22)
Fig. 11(a) and (b) shows the gain in the average SIR
versus , with the average PIBS as a parameter for
dB and dB. Fig. 11(a) is for ,
and Fig. 11(b) is for dB. and are
also plotted versus . It is found that the gain on the correct
beam increases, and the gain on the incorrect beam decreases
as increases. The gain on the correct beam approaches
its maximum of dB. The gain on the incorrect beam
approaches its minimum of 0 dB. It is obvious that if PIBS
, the gain is 0 dB. With PIBS , a positive gain can
be achieved for both cases of and
dB, and the gain for is larger than for
dB. Hence, an SIR improvement can also be achieved in
interference-limited environments, even if the average PIBS
is relatively large.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have analyzed the PIBS with a
switched multibeam antenna system under power-limited and
interference-limited mobile communication environments. A
simple beam-selection mechanism was assumed; complex
correlation peaks corresponding to the unique words, detected
by the matched filter matched to the unique word waveform,
are averaged over several consecutive unique words, and a
beam having the largest output is then selected. Noncoherent
integration was assumed for the averaging process. The beam
selection takes place frame-by-frame.
A two-beam antenna was assumed. It was assumed that
there is one desired user and one interferer and that each of
(a)
(b)
Fig. 11. (a) Gain in average SIR versus D1=D2 under interference-limited
environment for U1=U2 ! 1 and (b) gain in average SIR versus D1=D2
under interference-limited environment for U1=U2 = 0 dB.
the desired and interference transmissions has two propagation
paths: one goes to one of the two beams, and the other goes to
the other beam. With this model, the decision variable assoMATSUMOTO
et al.: BEAM-SELECTION PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 19
ciated with the PIBS turns out to be expressed as a quadratic
form of the complex random variable vector comprised of
desired interference and noise components at the matched filter
outputs. Hence, the characteristic function approach has been
used to derive the pdf of the decision variable.
It has been shown that the PIBS is dominated by the power
ratio of the two desired signal components; if the
ratio is small, a relatively high PIBS results. The averaging
process itself is not effective to reduce the PIBS if is
small. Time?diversity improvements can be achieved on the
PIBS versus by the averaging process if the maximum
Doppler frequency is relatively high compared with the frame
length.
The impacts of the incorrect beam selection on overall
average SNR and SIR were then investigated, both in the
power-limited and interference-limited environments. Under
the power-limited environment, the overall SNR improvement
over the omnidirectional antenna is relatively large, even
with PIBS Under the interference-limited environment,
larger overall SIR improvement can be achieved by smaller
PIBS and larger values if the interferer has only one
propagation path ( ). If dB, the impact
of the beam selection on the overall SIR improvement is small.
It should be emphasized that the receiver must tolerate such an
SNR (or SIR) encountered by the incorrect beam, even if the
PIBS (and, hence, the time during which the incorrect beam
is selected) can be made very small.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. A. Paulraj of Stanford
University and K. Kaczmarek, former Vice President of Nextel
Communications, for their helpful comments and suggestions.
The authors also would like to thank Dr. A. Chatterjee, former
Director of Nextel Communications, for his helpful advice on
manuscript improvement.
REFERENCES
[1] S. C. Swales, M. A. Beach, D. J. Edwards, and J. P. McGeehan, ÅgThe
performance enhancement of multibeam adaptive base-station antennas
for cellular land mobile radio systems,Åh IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol.
39, pp. 56?67, Feb. 1990.
[2] S. C. Swales, M. A. Beach, and D. J. Edwards, ÅgMulti-beam adaptive
base-station antennas for cellular land mobile radio systems,Åh in Proc.
IEEE VTC Åf89, San Francisco, CA, 1989, pp. 341?348.
[3] A. F. Naguib, A. Paulraj, and T. Kailath, ÅgCapacity improvement
with base-station antenna arrays in cellular CDMA,Åh IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 43, pp. 691?698, Aug. 1994.
[4] J. H. Winters, ÅgOptimum combining in digital mobile radio with
co-channel interference,Åh IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. VT-33, pp.
144?155, Aug. 1984.
[5] R. G. Vaughan, ÅgOn optimum combining at the mobile,Åh IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 37, pp. 181?188, Nov. 1988.
[6] J. H. Winters, ÅgSignal acquisition and tracking with adaptive arrays in
the digital mobile radio system IS-54 with flat fading,Åh IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 42, pp. 37?384, Nov. 1993.
[7] , ÅgThe impact of antenna diversity on the capacity of wireless
communications systems,Åh IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 42, pp.
1740?1751, Feb./Mar./Apr. 1994.
[8] R. A. Shade and A. M. Kowalski, ÅgIntelligent antennas for cellular
communications,Åh in Proc. IEEE 1994 Adaptive Ant. Syst. Symp., pp.
29?36.
[9] W. C. Jakes, Microwave Mobile Communications. New York: IEEE
Press, 1974, pp. 19?26.
[10] M. Schwarz, W. Bennett, and S. Stein, Communications Systems and
Techniques. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966, pp. 468?480.
[11] A. Mehrotra, Cellular Radio-Analog and Digital Systems. Norwood,
MA: Artech House, 1994, pp. 54?55.
Tadashi Matsumoto (MÅf84?SMÅf95) received
the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
engineering from Keio University, Yokohama-shi,
Japan, in 1978, 1980, and 1991, respectively.
In April 1980, he joined Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Corporation (NTT). From April 1980
to May 1987, he researched signal transmission
technologies, such as modulation/demodulation
schemes, as well as radio link design for mobile
communications systems. He participated in the
R&D project of NTTÅfs high-capacity mobile
communications system, where he was responsible for the development
of the base-station transmitter/receiver equipment for the system. From May
1987 to February 1991, he researched error-control strategies such as forward
error correction (FEC), trellis-coded modulation (TCM), and automatic repeat
request (ARQ) in digital mobile radio channels. He developed an efficient
new ARQ scheme suitable to the error occurrence in TDMA mobile signal
transmission environments. He was involved in the development of a Japanese
TDMA digital cellular mobile communications system. He took the leadership
for the development of the facsimile and data communications service units
for the system. In July 1992, he transferred to NTT Mobile Communications
Network, Inc. (NTT DoCoMo), Lafayette, CA. From February 1991 to April
1994, he was responsible for research on CDMA mobile communications
systems. He intensively researched multiuser detection schemes for multipath
mobile communications environments. He was also responsible for research
on error-control schemes for CDMA mobile communications systems. He
concentrated on research of a maximum a posteriori probability (MAP)
algorithm and its reduced complexity version for decoding of concatenated
codes. He took the leadership for the development of error-control equipment
for NTT DoCoMoÅfs CDMA mobile communications system. From 1992 to
1994, he served as a part-time Lecturer at Keio University. In April 1994,
he moved to NTT America and served as a Senior Technical Advisor of a
joint project with NTT and NEXTEL Communications. In March 1996, he
returned to NTT DoCoMo. Since then, he has been an Executive Research
Engineer of DoCoMoÅfs R&D Department.
Dr. Matsumoto is a member of the Institute of Electronics, Information,
and Communication Engineers of Japan.
Seiji Nishioka (MÅf95) received the B.S. degree
in electrical engineering from Waseda University,
Tokyo, Japan, in 1987.
In April 1987, he joined Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Corporation (NTT). Since then, he has
been engaged in the development of mobile radio
communication systems. From April 1987 to February
1990, he was involved in the development of
NTTÅfs high-capacity mobile communications system.
He was mainly involved in the development
of a channel resource management method for base
stations. He also participated in the trial test of that system. In July 1992, he
transferred to NTT Mobile Communications Network, Inc. (NTT DoCoMo),
Lafayette, CA. From February 1990 to April 1994, he was involved in the
development of a Japanese TDMA digital cellular mobile communications
system. He was mainly involved in the development of operations and
maintenance equipment for that system. In April 1994, he was transferred
to NTT America. From April 1994 to March 1996, he was involved in a joint
project with NTT and NEXTEL as a Technical Advisor. He has been mainly
involved in two activities in the joint project: audio transmission quality and
RF distribution technique. Currently, he is a Senior Manager of NTT America.
Mr. Nishioka is a member of the Institute of Electronics, Information, and
Communication Engineers of Japan.
20 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 46, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 1997
David J. Hodder (SÅf88?MÅf90) received the B.S.
and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the
University of Nevada, Reno, in 1990 and 1993,
respectively.
Prior to his school years, he spent 16 years with
the United States Navy in areas of communication
and radar systems. From 1989 to 1994, he was a
Chief Radio Engineer at the University of Nevada.
In 1991, he joined Telesis Technologies Laboratory,
PacTel Corporation, as a Senior RF Engineer for
PCS research. From 1994 to 1995, he was a Corporate
Manager of RF technology for Nextel Communications. He was a Project
Director for the development of a successful switched-beam smart antenna
system for a digital enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR) system. In
1995, he joined the faculty of Truckee Meadows Community College, Reno,
NV. Since then, he has been serving as an Associate Professor of Electronics
and Computer Technology. Currently, he is also Vice President of Engineering
at Telecommunications Group, Inc., Houston, TX. His research interests cover
communications systems design deployment and testing, fiber-optics, and
radar-guided vehicles.