
Title
Joint Decorrelating Multiuser Detection and
Channel Estimation in Asynchronous CDMA Mobile
Communications Channels

Issue Date 1995-08

Abstract- The asymptotic efficiencies of two decorrelators,
path-by-path and channel-matched decorrelators, are analyzed in
fading multipath propagation environments, and based upon the
analytical results, a new joint multiuser detection and channel
estimation scheme is proposed for asynchronous code division
multiple access (CDMA) mobile communications channels. In
the path-by-path decorrelator, each of the received signals corresponding
to one of the multiple propagation paths is regarded
as an independent interference source. On the contrary, in the
channel-matched decorrelator, each composif signal transmitted
from an identical user is regarded as a response of the multipath
channel to the corresponding user's spreading sequence. The
asymptotic efficiency of the path-by-path decorrelator is shown
to drop rapidly as the number of simultaneous users increases. It
is shown that the asymptotic efficiency can be made independent
of the number of the propagation paths by the channel-matched
decorrelator at the expense of requiring knowledge about the
fading complex envelopes of all the propagation paths.
The proposed joint multiuser detection and channel estimation
scheme uses both path-by-path and channel-matched decorrelators.
The path-by-path decorrelator is used for providing the
channel estimator with the (noisy) channel information pathby-
path, and decisions are made on the output of the channelmatched
decorrelator. The decision results are fed back to the
channel estimator, and used as the reference signals. The received
complex envelope of each of the propagation paths is estimated in
the channel estimator. Results of a series of exhaustive computer
simulations are presented in order to demonstrate the overall
performance of the proposed scheme, both in non-fading and
fading multipath propagation environments.
I. INTRODUCTION
A S SUGGESTED by previous papers [1]-[3], the near-far problem is the principal obstacle to be overcome for mobile/
personal communications systems using direct sequence
code division multiple access (DS/CDMA) signaling schemes,
in which, so far, interference signals transmitted from other
users are regarded as equivalent to noise. Multiuser detection
techniques have been considered as a breakthrough for this
problem, and recently several algorithm have been proposed
for multiuser detection [4]-[6]. The use of knowledge about
the crosscorrelations between the simultaneous users for whom
Manuscript received March 11, 1994; revised February 23, 1995.
T. Kawahara is with the NlT Mobile Communications Network Inc.,
Yokosuka-shi, Kanagawa-ken, 238-03 Japan.
T. Matsumoto was with the NlT Mobile Communications Network Inc.,
Yokosuka-shi, Kanagawa-ken, 238-03 Japan. He is now with NlT America,
c/o Nextel Communications, Lafayette, CA 94549, USA.
IEEE Log Number 9413007.
symbol synchronism is not necessarily assumed, in the multiuser
detection process, makes it possible to eliminate the
near-far problem. The improvement in detected data quality,
as well as the increase in the system user capacity over
conventional CDMA mobile communications systems, is the
major outcome wrought by multiuser detection at the expense
of increased receiver complexity.
The optimum multiuser detector calculates the Euclidean
distances between the received matched filter output vector
and each of the candidate vectors constructed, assuming that
all possible patterns of user information have been transmitted.
The calculated distances are then compared, and the vector
considered most likely to have been transmitted is output.
This process can efficiently be performed using the Viterbi
algorithm, whose complexity exponentially increases, unfortunately,
with the number of the users. Hence, the recent
research target has been multiuser detection using suboptimum
algorithms of practical complexity [7]-[ 101, [ 121.
The decorrelator proposed by Lupas and Verdu [7], [8] is a
suboptimum multiuser detector, and its complexity increases
only in proportion to the number of the users. The bit error rate
(BER) performance of the decorrelator is independent of the
interferer's received energies, and hence is near-far resistant.
It has been proven by Varanasi [9] that such near-far resistance
can be inherited by a multiuser detection system in which the
decorrelator is followed by a differential detector, aiming that
decorrelators can even be used in the situations where the
received signal phase varies, as in mobile communications.
One major drawback of the decorrelator is that it enhances
the noise present in the received signals. The measure which
well reflects the effect of the noise enhancement on the signal
transmission performance is the asymptotic efficiency. The
asymptotic efficiencies of the optimum and various suboptimum
multiuser detection schemes were analyzed in [ 111.
In mobile communications environments, because there are
many propagation paths with different delays between the
transmitter and receiver, the transmitted signal components
corresponding to these multiple propagation paths arrive at
different times. If the chip duration T, is smaller than all of the
differences in propagation delay time, each signal component
can be resolved in the despreading process. Recently, [ 161
derived the optimum multiuser detection scheme in Rician
fading environments, and analyzed the effects of the multipaths
on the asymptotic efficiencies of multiuser detection
0018-9545/95$04.00 0 1995 IEEE
KAWAHARA AND MATSUMOTO JOINT DECORRELATING MULTIUSER DETFXTION 507
schemes, assuming memoryless fading for each user. This
assumption makes the mathematical analysis simple. However,
it characterizes the fading variation as unestimatable.
The first half of this paper also analyzes the asymptotic
efficiency of the decorrelator under the multipath propagation
environment. It is shown that, if each received signal corresponding
to one of the multiple propagation paths is regarded
as an independent interference source in the decorrelator (this
type decorrelator is referred to as Ågpath-by-path decorrelator,Åh
for convenience) even though it bears the identical information
transmitted from the same user, the asymptotic efficiency drops
rapidly as the number of the users increases. If there are
L propagation paths for each of the simultaneous users, for
example, the asymptotic efficiency is almost equivalent to that
in the situation in which there is only one propagation path
and there are L times the number of users.
This decrease in the asymptotic efficiency due to the multipaths
can be recovered by decorrelating the composite of
those waveforms that are matched to the convolutions of the
corresponding userÅfs spreading sequences and channel impulse
responses (referred to as Ågchannel-matchedÅh decorrelator), as
proposed in [ 101. However, the channel-matched decorrelator
requires knowledge about the fading complex envelopes of all
propagation paths.
Based upon the above analysis of the asymptotic efficiency,
this paper proposes a new joint multiuser detection and channel
estimation scheme for asynchronous CDMA mobile communications
channels. Both the path-by-path and channel-matched
decorrelators are used. The path-by-path decorrelator is not
used for making decisions on the simultaneous users, but
is used for providing the channel estimator with the (noisy)
channel information path-by-path. Decisions are made on the
output of the channel-matched decorrelator to obtain estimates
of each userÅfs transmitted information. The estimates are fed
back to the channel estimator, and used as the reference
signals. The received complex envelope of each propagation
path is estimated by the channel estimator, and then input to
the channel-matched decorrelator.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 11 presents the
system model used in this paper. The asynchronous CDMA
communication channel suffering from multipath propagation
is first described, and the matrix transfer functions of the pathby-
path and channel-matched decorrelators are then presented.
It is shown that these decorrelators can be implemented in the
form of a vector digital filter whose implementation does not
require the inverse of the matrix rational transfer function;
instead, it only requires the inverse of the partial correlation
matrices. This configuration corresponds to an infinite
series expansion of the matrix transfer function. Section 111
presents a simple expression of the asymptotic efficiencies
of the decorrelators, using the series expansion of the matrix
transfer function. Section I11 then examines the effect of the
multipath on the asymptotic efficiency. Section IV describes
the proposed joint multiuser detection and channel estimation
scheme, where the standard recursive least square (RLS)
algorithm is used for channel estimation. Section V shows the
results of computer simulations conducted for the performance
evaluations of the proposed scheme.
11. SYSTEM MODEL
A. Multipath Channel Model
There are K simultaneous users in the system being considered.
Each of the simultaneous users transmits its information
symbol using the DS/CDMA signalling scheme. The complex
received signal can be expressed as
Z ( t ) = S( t , b) + n( t ) (1)
where n(t) is additive white Guassian noise (AWGN) with
power spectral density u2, and
. S k ( t - i T - - T k , l ) . (2)
s k ( t ) is the normalized spreading sequence, and is zero
outside the interval [0, T] with T being the information symbol
duration. b(i) = [ b l ( i ) , b 2 ( i ) , . . . , bK(i)lt is the information
symbol vector and i E { -00, m}. L k is the number of the
propagation paths encountered by the kth user. Z k , I ( z ) is the
normalized fading complex envelope with the Zth path of the
kth user, and W k ( i ) is the kth userÅfs received energy, both of
which are in the ith time slot. w k ( z ) reflects the normalization
on Z k , l ( Z ) Åf S such that
Lk
~ , , l ( i )z i , l ( i )= 1 , for 1 IIC I K (3)
where * denotes the complex conjugate. T k , 1 is the delay on
Z k , l ( i ) . It is assumed that T~~ = 0, without loss of generality,
and others lie within the range of [O,T],Åf and that the chip
duration T, is smaller than all of the differences in propagation
delay time.
1=1
B. Decorrelators
The received signal components corresponding to the
multipaths are despread path-by-path. The z-transform
Y(z) of output vector y ( i ) = [ y l , l ( i ) , . . . , y l , L 1 (i),
y z , ~ ( i .) ., . , Y K ,h K( i ) l t of the matched filters, each of which
is matched to its corresponding spreading sequence, can be
expressed as
Y(2)= [RH(l)*+ R(0)+ R( l ) z - l ][ PWB](2+) N( z )
(4)
where R(O) and R(1) are the partial correlation matrices,
and RH(m) with m = 0,l denotes the transposed complex
conjugate of R(m). The (p, q) element of R(m) is given by
[81
00
Rpq(m) = s k ( t - T k , j ) sk/(t f mT-Tkf,jt) dt (5)
with
k - 1 P=CL m + j
m=l
ÅeFor delays lying out of the range of [O. TI, a similar theory may be derived
by denoting the channel gain matrix P, given by (6), a function of z . This is
out of the scope of this paper.
508 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 44. NO. 3. AUGUST 1995
and
m=l
p corresponds to the kth userÅfs lth path, q corresponds to
kÅfth userÅfs lÅfth path with 1 5 j 5 Lk, 1 5 jÅf 5 L k , ,
1 5 k 5 K and 1 5 ICÅf 5 K . [PWB] ( za)n d N (2) are the z -
transforms of the vector sequence P(i)W(i)b(iw) ith W( i )=
Ding [ a,m, . . . ,, /man]d t he noise sequence
n( i )= [n,l,l ( i ) ,. . . 721, L~ ( i ) ,7 ~ 2~,( i ) , .. . , n ~L~ ,( i ) l t at the
matched filter output, respectively. P is the channel gain
matrix given by
1) Path-by-Path Decorrelator: The path-by-path decorrelator
assumes that each of the received signals corresponding
to the propagation paths is an independent interference [ 131,
[17], [18]. Hence, signal processing of the path-by-path decorrelator
is equivalent to the inverse filter of [RH(1 ). + R(0)+
R( l ) z - l ]T. he z-transform Z,(Zo)f its output vector z p ( i )=
[ z , ~ , ~ ( i ) : . .. z p l , ~ l ( i z)p.2 , 1 ( i ) . . . . . z , K , L K ( ~ ) ]b~ec omes
transform Z,(z) of the decorrelator output vector z,(i) =
[ z c l ( i ) .z ,z(i), . . . . z , ~ ( i )b]ec~om es
where
is the matrix transfer function. Furthermore, if C = PH,
(12) is equivalent to decorrelating the composite of those
waveforms that are matched to the convolutions of the corresponding
usersÅf spreading sequences and channel impulse
responses (or equivalently, matched to the channel responses
to the usersÅf spreading sequences) [lo]. Hence, this decorrelator
is referred to as a Ågchannel-matchedÅe decorrelator.*
The assumption that the channel gains Zk, l(i)Åfs are constant
is reasonable if the memory length (= length of the impulse
response) of the decorrelator is sufficiently small compared
to the speed of the channel variation. If so, matrix P can be
updated every time the new estimates of Zk,l ( i ) Åf s are obtained.
This effect will be investigated in Section V.
C. Series Expansion of Matrix Transfer Function
Both matrix transfer functions, G p ( z ) and Gc(z), respectively,
of the path-by-path and channel-matched decorrelators,
have the same form of
where
is the matrix transfer function of the path-by-path decorrelator.
The combiner combines all the decorrelated signal components
transmitted from the identical users. Assuming that
the complex envelopes zk, l(2)Åfs are known to the receiver,
maximum ratio combining (MRC) can be used. The output
vector zL( i ) = [ z b l ( i ) ,z b 2 ( 2 ) , . . . , z&(i)lt of the MRC
combiner can be expressed as
2) Channel-Matched Decorrelator: The other type of decorrelator
combines all the received signal components
transmitted from the identical users prior to decorrelation.
The z-transform YÅf(z) of the combiner output yÅf(i) =
[yi ( 2 ) . yi ( i ) , . . . , yk (i)]Åf can therefore be expressed as
YÅf(z) = c Y ( z )
=CIRH( l ) z+ R(0)+ R( l ) z - l ]
. [PWB]( 2 )+ CN(z ) (10)
where, for the path-by-path decorrelator, A1 = RH( l )A,0 =
R(O), and A-1 = R(l), and for the channel-matched decorrelator,
AI = PHRH( l )PA,0 = PHR(0)P,a nd A-1 =
PHR(l)P. It is likely that P is column full rank since
PÅfs elements are the samples of independent complex fading
envelopes. Assume that R(0) is nonsingular. PHR(0)Pth en
becomes nonsingular. Because of the nonsingularity of matrix
A0 for both decorrelators, (13) can be expanded into an infinite
series as
Equation (14) has terms of zm with m > 0 which correspond
to noncausal components in the decorrelatorÅfs impulse
response. In practice, at the cost of appreciable performance
degradation, these noncausal components can be truncated
after an appropriate delay. Let ICT denote the delay for the
truncation. Equation (14) can then be approximated by the
where matrix C corresponds to combining. If the channel
gains z k , l ( i ) Åf s are constant in in (lo)
can be taken out of [PWB] ( z )t;h e result is that the z-
* [ 191 has used this Ågchannel matchedÅh concept for the multiuser maximum
likelihood sequence detection scheme in multipath Rayleigh fading channels,
assuming the perfect knowledge of zk [ ( I ) .
the matrix
KAWAHARA AND MATSUMOTO: JOINT DECORRELATING MULTIUSER DETECTION
~
509
Tc) Output
Input- - ..
j -1
Fig. 1. Block diagram of decorrelator with truncation length k r .
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Number of Users
Fig. 2. Asymptotic efficiency versus number of users.
causal filter
which indicates that the impulse response of the approximated
decorrelator has a length of 2 k +~ 1 .
A block diagram of the signal processing required to implement
the approximated decorrelators given by (15) is shown
in Fig. 1. Obviously, the inverse matrix of the rational transfer
function is not needed; only matrix inversion for Ai' is
needed. This is promising for the practical implementation of
the decorrelators.
111. ASYMFTOTIC EFFICIENCY
Asymptotic efficiency is known to well express the nearfar
resistance of multiuser detectors. Several suboptimum
multiuser detectors' near-far resistance have been analyzed in
[ 113 from the asymptotic efficiency viewpoint. This section
evaluates the asymptotic efficiencies of the path-by-path and
channel-matched decorrelators.
The kth user's asymptotic efficiencies T$ and vi, of the
path-by-path and channel-matched decorrelators, respectively,
are related to the vector impulse response of the noncausal
linear filter [Alz+ A. + A-lz-l]at timing 0. Let dpk,l(0)
denote the response of Gp ( z )a t time 0 to the input vector
ip(i) = [ O . . .o 1 0. * * O]t, 2 = 0 r (E Lm + l ) th element (16)
m=l
and let dck(0) denote the impulse response of G,(z) at time
0 to the input vector
i , ( i ) = [ O . . . O 1 O...O]t, i = o r
lcth element (17)
for which ip(i) = 0 and ic(i) = 0 for i # 0. dpk,1(O) and
d,k(O) can be approximately calculated as the responses of
the causal linear filter of (15) to the input vectors of ip(i) and
ic( i ) ,re spectively, at time l c ~T.$ and are calculated below.
A. Path-by-Path Decorrelator
Let Np(z)d enote the z-transform of the vector noise
sequence np(i)= [nPl(i)n,P 2(i),. . . nP~(i)latt the MRC
combiner output. Obviously, Np ( z )= PHGF( z )N( z )a,n d
thus the z-transform of the covariance matrix sequence
(np(o)nF(o+ i ) ) is equal to a2PHGp(z)Ps,in ce the ztransform
of the covariance matrix sequence (n( O ) n H ( + i ) )
of the noise sequence at the matched filter output is equal to
a2Gi1(z). Hence, npk(i) is a zero mean Gaussian random
variable with variance a2[PHDp(0)kP,] wkh,er e
and the kth user's asymptotic efficiency qf of the path-by-path
decorrelator tums out to be
B. Channel-Matched Decorrelator
The z-transform N,(z) of the vector noise sequence n,(i) =
[n,1, n , ~ ( i.) . ~ e nC~(i)latt the channel-matched decorrelator
output can be expressed as N,(z) = G,(z)PHN(z).
Thus, the z-transform of the covariance matrix sequence
(n,(o)nF(o + i)) is equal to 02G,(z) since, with the ztransform
of (n(o)nH(o + i)) being azGil(z), G,(z) =
[PHG; l ( ~ )P] -Hle.n ce, n , k ( i ) is a zero mean Gaussian
random variable with variance 02[Dc(0k), ]wkhe,r e
510 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 44, NO. 3, AUGUST 1995
and the kth userÅfs asymptotic efficiency 7; of the channelmatched
decorrelator becomes
C. Numerical Calculations
Under fading, the received normalized fading complex
envelope z k , J ( i ) with the Ith path of the kth user is an independent
complex random Gaussian variable. Also, in practical
asynchronous CDMA mobile communications environments,
delays Tk,lÅfs are random variables. Hence, the kth userÅfs
asymptotic efficiencies 7: and vi, respectively, of the pathby-
path and of the channel-matched decorrelators, become
random variables.
For numerical calculations, the 7; and 77; values were evaluated
for fixed values of zk,l(z)Åfs and Tk,lÅfs. The spreading
sequences for each user were randomly picked from among
the length 31 Gold sequences. The calculated 7;Åfs and 7;Åfs
were then averaged over a large number of sets of the values
of z k , l ( i ) Åf s and r k , l Åf s , and among the users. Tk,lÅfs took
values of nT,, where n is an integer uniformly distributed
over the range of [0, 301. Fig. 2 shows the calculated average
asymptotic efficiencies (qp) and (7Åe) versus the number K
of the simultaneous users with the number of the propagation
paths as a parameter. It is found from this figure that, in the
multipaths, the average asymptotic efficiency of the path-bypath
decorrelator decreases rapidly as K increases. If there are
L propagation paths for each simultaneous user, for example,
( r f ) is almost equivalent to that in the situation in which there
is only one propagation path and there are L times as many as
users. On the other hand, (7Åe) does not rapidly decrease as K
increases, and is equivalent to the path-by-path decorrelatorÅfs
asymptotic efficiency with one propagation path.
IV. JOINT DECORRELATINMG ULTIUSER
DETECTIONA ND CHANNEL ESTIMATION
An important outcome of the numerical calculations in
Section 111 is the fact that the average asymptotic efficiency
of the channel-matched decorrelator does not degrade in
the presence of multipaths at the expense of a complexity
increase for channel estimation. However, the information
about each of the multipath channels is lost at the output of the
channel-matched decorrelator. On the contrary, path-by-path
channel estimation is possible at the path-by-path decorrelator
output which, unfortunately, suffers from increased noise
enhancement due to the presence of multipaths.
One reasonable solution to the problem of joint multiuser
detection and channel estimation using decorrelators is to use
the path-by-path decorrelator to provide the channel estimator
with the (noisy) channel information path-by-path, and to use
the channel-matched decorrelator for making the decisions that
yield estimates of each userÅfs transmitted information symbol.
A block diagram of the proposed joint multiuser detection and
channel estimation system is shown in Fig. 3(a). The input to
the system is the sum of the signals transmitted from K users.
lcth user is suffering from the multipaths comprised of LI,
propagation paths. The outputs of the matched filters, which
are matched to each userÅfs spreading sequence, have signal
components corresponding to the propagation paths; kth userÅfs
matched filter output has LI, signal components in one symbol
duration T. Assuming that the delays on each propagation
paths are known, these signal components are sampled, and
input to both the path-by-path and channel-matched decorrelators.
In the channel-matched decorrelator, combining takes
place prior to decorrelation, where an estimate of the channel
gains matrix P output from the channel estimator is used. The
PÅfs estimate is also used in the channel-matched decorrelator
to calculate the matrices of AI = PHRH( l ) PA, 0 =
PHR(0)P and A-1 = PHR(l)P.
As shown in Fig. 3(b), training sequences are embedded in
each userÅfs information symbol stream to be transmitted in
order to enhance the convergence of the algorithm used for
channel estimation. Fig. 3(c) shows a block diagram of the
channel estimator for the kth userÅfs Ith path. Assuming that
the timing, at which the training sequences are transmitted
from each user, is known to the receiver, each userÅfs training
pattern can be used in the channel estimator as the reference
signal during the training period (Selectors in Fig. 3(a) and
(c) are switched to ÅgTraining.Åh) Decisions are made on the
output of the channel-matched decorrelator output to obtain
the estimates of the transmitted information. These estimates
are not only the system output, but they are also used as the
reference signals outside the training period.
The received complex envelope zk,l of the kth userÅfs Ith
propagation path is estimated by the channel estimator using
the path-by-path decorrelator outputs and the reference signals.
The estimation process for the lcth user is done independently
of other users. The estimated values of zk,lÅfs are then used
to construct the channel gain matrix P. The approximated
decorrelators with the truncation length of 2 l c ~+ 1 are used
for both the path-by-path and channel-matched decorrelators.
Therefore, the influence of one sample vector of the matched
filter outputs lasts for ( 2 k +~ l )T after the sampling takes
place.
The standard RLS algorithm [14] was used to estimate the
fading complex envelopes zI,, 1 Åf s . The estimate of the channel
gain matrix P can be updated every time the path-by-path
decorrelator output z p ( i ) and the reference signal vector are
obtained. However, the approximated decorrelatorÅfs matrix
transfer function of (15), whose block diagram was depicted in
Fig. 1, suggests that the values of zk, 1Åfs in the matrix P should
be kept constant during the period of 2 l c ~+ 1. Nevertheless,
updating the PÅfs estimate in the approximated decorrelator at
every symbol timing may not affect the overall performance of
the proposed system, if the required truncation length l c f~or an
acceptable approximation is sufficiently small compared to the
channel variation. This effect was examined through computer
simulations, and the results are presented in Section V.
V. SIMULATIONR ESULTS
An exhaustive series of computer simulations was conducted
in order to examine what factor of the proposed system
dominates the overall performance. Results of the simulations
are described below.
KAWAHARA AND MATSUMOTO JOINT DECORRELATING MULTIUSER DETECTION 511
L D a t a
e
e
#2
e
Data
__c #K
. . . ............ ............................................. Channel Matched Decorrelator Åe Åeq)
(a)
Path-by-Path Decorrelator Output Training Sequence
...... ......
...... ......
Estimate of the
k-lh UserÅfs
zkjs Estimate From Decision
Algorithm Circuit
To Channel Matched
Information Sequence Decorrelator
(b) (C)
Fig. 3.
for the kth userÅfs Ith path.
(a) Block diagram of proposed joint multiuser detection and channel estimation system. (b) Frame format. (c) Block diagram of channel estimator
I ) Without Fading: First, it was determined how large the
truncation length k~ must be for (15) to accurately approximate
decorrelation. To do so, in the initial stage of the
simulations, neither multipath nor fading was assumed. Even
in this simple situation, each userÅfs BER performance is
affected by the relative delays. Hence, in the simulations, each
userÅfs BER was evaluated for fixed values of the relative
delays; this process was repeated many times for different
values of the relative delays. The spreading sequences were
randomly picked up from among the length 3 1 Gold sequences.
The obtained BERÅfs were then averaged over the relative
delays and among the users. Binary phase shift keying (BPSK)
was assumed. Fig. 4 shows the average BER performance
versus the truncation length k~ (length of the impulse response
is 2kT + 1) for the signal-to-noise (SNR) power ratio after
despreading of 7 dB with the number of users as a parameter.
In this case, each userÅfs received signal is assumed to have
identical energy. It is found that if k~ 2 2, the BER reduction
plateaus. Hence, in this case, k~ = 2 is sufficient.
The approximated decorrelators may lose the near-far resistance
originally offered by the decorrelator. In order to
examine the effect of truncation on the near-far resistance,
BERÅfs were evaluated assuming that the received signal energies
of interferers are larger than that of the one reference
user. Fig. 5 shows the reference userÅfs BER averaged over
the relative delays versus the received signal energy ratio
of wl/wk with 2 5 k 5 K; it was assumed that each
interferer has identical received signal energy. Parameters are
the number of users K and truncation length kT. It is found
that ICT = 2 truncation length obviously degrades the nearfar
resistance. If k~ = 4 and K = 5, the approximated
decorrelator is still near-far resistant up to ÅewI/wk = -10.0
dB. If k~ = 4 and K = 10, power control with the aim of
achieving w1 /wk 2 - 10 dB is required.
512 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 44, NO. 3, AUGUST 1995
t SNR after Despreading = 7dB Without Fading
10
WLe
a,
m s
1U 2 4 6 8
Truncation Length
Fig. 4. Average BER versus truncation length.
Fig. 6 shows the BERÅfs of the path-by-path and channelmatched
decorrelators, averaged over various values of the
channel gains Z k , l Åf s satisfying (3) and among users, versus
SNR after despreading in one-path and equal energy twopath
propagation environments for K = 5 and K = 10
(ÅgL-path propagationÅh indicates that there are L propagation
paths for each user, for convenience). ICT = 4 was used for
the approximation. Perfect knowledge about the channel gains
was assumed. It is found that for the path-by-path decorrelator,
the average BER performance for the five-user two-path
propagation environment is almost equivalent to that for the
ten-user one-path propagation environment. As observed in
this figure, the channel-matched decorrelatorÅfs average BER
performance is independent of the multipaths: the BERÅfs for
K = 5 and 10 in two-path propagation environment are
equivalent, respectively, to that for K = 5 and to that for K =
10 in one-path propagation environment. These results support
the analysis of the asymptotic efficiency made in Section 111.
In the proposed scheme, the channel-matched decorrelator
uses estimates of channel gains z k , 1Åfs. Hence, the overall
performance depends largely on the accuracy of the channel
estimation using the path-by-path decorrelator output and the
results of the data decision made at the output of the channelmatched
decorrelator. The behavior of the estimated channel
gains, ~ 1 1 , 2 1 2i,s demonstrated in Fig. 7 for the three-user twopath
propagation environment with the SNR after despreading
of 15 dB. The length 8 training symbols were embedded
among the information data streams to be transmitted, which
are asynchronous among the users, but whose timings are assumed
to be known to the receiver. The channel gain matrix P
in this case was (see bottom of this page). It is found that these
values converge after 20 input symbols, including training.
2) With Fading: Under fading, the channel gains Zk, 1Åfs (or
equivalently fading complex envelopes), vary as the users
move. Hence, mismatch between the channel-matched decorrelator
and the actual channel gains Z k , l Åf s may result in
SNR after Despreading = 7 dB
10 3Åf I
-10 -20
wilwk (dW
Fig. 5 . First userÅfs average BER versus received signal energy ratio ~ Åe /1w k .
. + 2 paths 10 users Pathbypath
. 1 path 5 users
1 path 10 users
- __- - - .. 1 path 1 userneory
10-43 5 7 9
SNR after Despreading (dB)
Fig. 6. BER versus SNR after despreading (without fading).
an overall performance degradation of the proposed system.
This mismatch is caused by two factors: 1) too large a
required truncation length ICT compared to the speed of the
channel variation, and 2) insufficient tracking performance of
the RLS algorithm used for channel estimation. Fortunately,
however, Fig. 5 indicated that ICT = 4 truncation length,
which corresponds to the impulse response length of 9, can
prevent the near-far resistance from being degraded, if K =
5. Therefore, even under fading, if channels can be regarded
as remaining unchanged during 9 time slots of information
symbols, the effect of the update of the matrix PÅfs estimate
at every symbol timing is of no significance.
-0.80 + j0.76 -0.87 - j0.29 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
P = [ 0.00 0.00 0.35 + j0.81 0.90 - j0.61 0.00 0.00 ] 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 -0.51 - j0.10 0.69 + j0.44
KAWAHARA AND MATSUMOTO: JOINT DECORRELATING MULTIUSER DETECTION
Training Period
.........
0.5
SNR after despreading = 15dB
E
e . x i
........................ .........-...._..
20 40 60 80 100
-1.51 " ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' '
Iterations
Fig. 7. Behavior of estimated channel gains.
Fig. 8 compares, for k~ = 4, the average BER performance
of the proposed system to those with three other (unrealistic)
systems using actual values of the channel gains: a) the
decisions are made using channel-matched decorrelator output;
b) the path-by-path decorrelator outputs are combined by
the MRC combiner, and the decisions are made using its
output; and c) the matched filter outputs are combined by the
MRC combiner, and the decisions are made using its output,
in which a 3-path propagation environment is assumed and
the matrix P's estimate is updated at every symbol timing
(these three systems are referred to as system (a), (b), and
(c), respectively, for convenience). Assuming that every user
moves with the same speed, the normalized maximum Doppler
frequency f D T given by speed of users' move x symbol
duratiodcarrier wave length was set at 0.002. The frame
length was 64 symbols, which includes an 8-symbol raining
sequence. Binary 8-symbol random sequences were picked up
and used as training sequences for the users, and the results
were averaged over the users.
In the fading L-path propagation environment, the theoretical
average BER Pb for the BPSK coherent detection can be
calculated from [ 151
where I? is the average SNR. The theoretical average BER
is also plotted in Fig. 8. Obviously, the best performance
is achieved by system (a). The simulation results indicate
that, because of the noise enhancement, the system (a)'s BER
performance is slightly worse than the theoretical curve (the
average asymptotic efficiency is 0.6 dB in this case; however,
because of data dispersion, this 0.6 dB noise enhancement
cannot be clearly observed). This indicates that, for foT =
0.002, the effect of the update of the matrix P's estimate at
every symbol timing is not significant.
Because of the increased noise enhancement in the multipath
propagation environment, the BER of system (b) is 2 dB worse
513
I
7 9 11 13 15 17
Average SNR after Despreading
Fig. 8. Average BER versus average SNR after despreading (in fading).
(c) is far worse than the systems with decorrelators. For the
proposed system, the BER is worse than that of system (a), and
is almost equivalent to that of system (b) for small values of
average SNR after despreading. The BER curve deviates from
that of system (b) as the average SNR becomes larger. These
BER degradations are due to insufficient tracking performance
of the channel estimator.
Fig. 9 shows, for frame lengths of 32, 64, and 128, the
average BER's of the proposed system and system (a) versus
the normalized maximum Doppler frequency f D T . The average
BER of the proposed system increases as foT becomes
larger, and the BER degradation is more significant for a larger
frame length than a smaller one. This can easily be understood
because it is likely to happen that, for a longer frame length,
the channel estimation error becomes larger at the tail of the
frame than at other parts of the frame. The average BER of
system (a) stays the same even when ~ D inTcr eases. Hence,
the major cause of bit error in the proposed scheme is the
channel estimation error. The effects of the truncation in the
approximated decorrelator and the update of the matrix P's
estimate at every symbol timing are of no significance.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have analyzed the asymptotic efficiencies
of the path-by-path and channel-matched decorrelators in
the multipath propagation environment, and proposed a new
joint multiuser detection and channel estimation scheme for
asynchronous CDMA mobile communications channels. It has
been shown that in the multipath propagation environment, the
asymptotic efficiency of the path-by-path decorrelator drops
rapidly as the number of the simultaneous users increases. If
there are L propagation paths for each simultaneous user, for
example, the asymptotic efficiency is almost equivalent to that
in the situation in which there is only one propagation path
and L times as many users.
It was shown that this decrease in the asymptotic efficiency
due to the multipaths can be recovered by the channelthan
that of system (a) at BER = The BER of system matched decorrelator for those waveforms that are matched
514 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 44, NO. 3, AUGUST 1995
SNR after despreading = lOdB 1
5 users
u - - - - - o
128 symbols (Perfect Knowledge about Channel Gains)
10 -2
IU _______
10 -3
Normalized Maximum Doppler Frequency fDT
Fig. 9. Average BER versus normalized maximum Doppler frequency f n T .
to the multipath channel responses to the usersÅf spreading
sequences. The channel-matched decorrelator does, however,
require knowledge about the fading complex envelopes of all
propagation paths.
In the proposed joint multiuser detection and channel estimation
scheme, both path-by-path and channel-matched decorrelators
are used. The path-by-path decorrelator is not used
for making decisions on the simultaneous users, but is used
for providing the channel estimator with the channel information
path-by-path. Decisions are made on the output of
the channel-matched decorrelator to obtain estimates of each
usersÅf transmitted information. The estimates are fed back
to the channel estimator, and used as the reference signals.
The received complex envelope of each propagation path is
estimated in the channel estimator using the RLS algorithm,
and then input to the channel-matched decorrelator. Assuming
that the truncation length required to achieve an acceptable
approximation is sufficiently small compared to the channel
variation, the channel gain matrix is updated every time the
path-by-path decorrelator output and the reference vector are
obtained.
An exhaustive series of computer simulations was conducted
in order to evaluate the overall performance of the proposed
scheme, and examine what factor of the proposed system
dominates performance. Reasonable results were obtained in
the non-fading and fading environments. It was shown that the
truncation length assumption is not a major cause of overall
performance degradation. The simulation results showed that a
major cause of bit error in the proposed scheme is channel estimation
error. Hence, it should be emphasized that improving
the tracking performance of the channel estimator improves
the overall performance of the proposed joint decorrelating
multiuser detection and channel estimation scheme.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank reviewers for their helpful
criticism and comments which greatly improved this paper.
REFERENCES
[l] G. R. Cooper and R. W. Nettleton, ÅgA spread spectrum technique for
high cauacitv mobile communications,Åh IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol.
V?-27,-pp. i64-275, Nov. 1978.
1_21_ K. S. Gilhousen et al.. ÅgOn the capacity of a cellular CDMA system,Åh
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 4 0 pp..303-312, May 1991.
[3] W. C. Y. Lee, ÅgOverview of cellular CDMA,Åh IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 40, pp. 291-302, May 1991.
[4] A. J. Viterbi, ÅgVery low rate codes for maximum theoretical performance
of spread-spectrum multiple-access channels,Åh IEEE J. Selecr. Areas
Commun., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 641449, May 1990.
[5] Z. Xie, C. K. Rushforth, and R. T. Short, ÅgMultiuser signal detection
using sequential decoding,Åh IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 38, pp. 578-583,
no. 5, May 1990.
[6] S. Verdu, ÅgOptimum multiuser asymptotic efficiency,Åh IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. COM-34, no. 9, pp. 89&897, Sept. 1986.
[7] R. Lupas and S. Verdu, ÅgLinear multiuser detectors for synchronous
code-division multiple-access channels,Åh IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 123-136, Jan. 1989.
[8] -, ÅgNear-far resistance of multiuser detectors in asynchronous
channels,Åh IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 496508, April
1990.
[9] M. K. Varanasi, ÅgNoncoherent detection in asynchronous multiuser
channels,Åh IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 157-176,
Jan. 1993.
[lo] A. Klein and P. W. Baier, ÅgLinear unbiased data estimation in mobile
radio systems applying CDMA,Åh IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol.
11, no. 7, pp. 1058-1066, Sept. 1993.
[ l l ] Z. Xie, R. T. Short, and C. K. Rushforth, ÅgA family of suboptimum
detectors for coherent multiuser communications,Åh IEEE J. Selecr. Areas
Commun., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 683490, May 1990.
[ 121 A. Duel-Hallen, ÅgDecorrelating decision-feedback multiuser detector
for synchronous code-division multiple-access channel,Åh IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 285-290, Feb. 1993.
[13] S. S. H. Wijayasuriya, J. P. McGeehan, and G.H. Norton, ÅgRAKE
decorrelating receiver for DS-CDMA mobile radio networks,Åh IEE
Electron. Lett., vol. 29, pp. 395-396, Aug. 1993.
141 S. Haykin, Adaptive Filter Theory, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1991, pp. 477-507.
151 M. Schwartz, W. R. Bennett, and S. Stein, Communication Systems and
Techniques.
161 S. Vasudevan and M. K. Varanasi, ÅgOptimum diversity combiner based
multiuser detection for time-dispersive Rician fading channels,Åh IEEE
J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 580-592, May 1994.
171 Z. Zvonar and D. Brady, ÅgCoherent and differentially coherent multiuser
detectors for asynchronous CDMA frequency-selective channels,Åh in
Proc. Military Communications Con& San Diego, CA, Oct. 1992, pp.
442446.
181 -, ÅgSuboptimum multiuser detector for synchronous CDMA
frequency-selective Rayleigh fading channels,Åh in Proc. Globecom,
Communication Theory Mini-Con$, Orlando, FL, Dec. 1992, pp. 82-86.
191 __ , ÅgOptimum detection in asynchronous multiple-access multipath
Rayleigh fading channels,Åh in Proc. Con$ on Information Sciences and
Systems, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 1992, pp. 826-831.
.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966, pp. 459466.
Toshim Kawahara (MÅf92) received the B.S. degree
and the M.S. degree in electronics from Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan, in 1989 and 1991, respectively.
In 1991, he joined Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
Corporation (NlT). He researched Direct
Sequence (DS) and Frequency Hopping (FH) Code
Division Multiple Access (CDMA) applications to
mobile radio communications systems. Since July
1992, he has been with ÅgIT Mobile Communications
Network Inc (NlT DoCoMo), Yokosukashi,
Kanagawa-ken, Japan From 1993 to 1994, he researched voice signal
processing for a low bit rate speech codec Recently, he has been researching
combined source and channel coding algonthm for mobile video
communications His current research interest covers CDMA technologies
and sourcekhannel coding schemes for multimedia mobile communications
applications
KAWAHARA AND MATSUMOTO: JOINT DECORRELATING MULTIUSER DETECTION 515
Tadashi Matsumoto (MÅf84) received the B.S.
degree, the M.S. degree, and the Doctorate degree
in electrical engineering from Keio University,
Yokohama-shi, Japan, in 1978, 1980, and 1991,
respectively.
He joined Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
Corporation (NTT) in April 1980. From April 1980
to May 1987, he researched signal transmission
technoloeies. such as modulationldemodulation v
schemes, as well as radio link design for mobile
communications systems He participated in the
R&D project of NTTÅfs high-capacity mobile communications system, where
he was responsible for the development of the base station transmitter/receiver
equipment for the system From May 1987 to February 1991, he researched
error control strategies, such as Forward Error Correction (FEC), Trellis
Coded Modulation (TCM), and Automatic Repeat Request (ARQ) in digital
mobile radio channels He developed an efficient new ARQ scheme suitable
to the error occurrence in TDMA mobile signal transrmssion environments
He was involved in the development of a Japanese TDMA Digital Cellular
Mobile Communications System He took the leadership for the development
of the facsirmle and data communications service units for the system
Since July 1992, he has been with NTT Mobile Communications Network
Inc (NlT DoCoMo), Yokosuka-shi, Kanagawa-ken, Japan From February
1991 to Apnl 1994, he was responsible for research on Code Division
Multiple Access (CDMA) mobile communications systems. He intensively
researched multiuser detection schemes for multipath mobile communications
environments He was also responsible for research on error control schemes
for CDMA Mobile communicahons systems He concentrated on research
of Maximum Apostenori Probability (MAP) algonthm and its reduced
complexity version for decoding of concatenated codes He took the leadership
for the development of error control equipment for NTT DoCoMoÅfs CDMA
Mobile Communications System. From 1992 to 1994, he served as a part-time
lecturer at Keio University. In Apnl 1994, he moved to N?T Amenca, and
since then he has been serving as a senior technical advisor of the joint
project with NTT and NEXTEL Communications
Dr Matsumoto is a member of the Institute of Electronics, Information,
and Communication Engineers of Japan.